
				Page: 1177GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2243
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(Cap. 286)
COMPLETION OF PART DEVELOPMENT PLANS
PDP No. 167/2016/01
PDP No. 167/2016/02 for Proposed Site for Court of Appeal (Judiciary), Meru Town;
PDP No. MRU/1911/15/01 for Proposed Site for Githongo Law Courts (Judiciary);
Proposed Site for Mixed Development– Meru County Investment and Development Corporation;
Proposed Site for Commercial Development–Meru County Investment and Development Corporation;
Proposed Site for Commercial Development–Meru County Investment and Development Corporation;
Existing Site for Meru County Government Headquarters;
Proposed Site for Meru County Government Offices;
Existing Site for Commercial Development–Meru County Investment and Development Corporation;
Proposed Site for Industrial Development– Meru County Investment and Development Corporation.
NOTICE is given that the above-mentioned part development plans were completed.
The part development plans relates to land situated within Meru Town, Imenti North Sub-county in Meru County.
Copies of the part development plans have been deposited for public inspection at the Chief Officer Land, ICT AND Planning, the Administrator Meru Town and the County Director Land and  Physical Planning Offices, Meru.
The copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons interested at the Chief Officer Land, ICT AND Planning, the Administrator Meru Town and the County Director Land and  Physical Planning Offices, Meru, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m., Monday to Friday.
Any interested person who wishes to make any representation in connection with or objection to the above-named part development plan may send such representations or objections in writing to be received by the County Physical Planning Officer, P.O. Box 120–60200, Meru, within sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this notice and such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
Dated the 7th March, 2016.
J. M. PAUL,
MR/8808458                            for Director of Physical Planning.

