
				Page: 903GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3507
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL STATION EMBAKASI, UTAWALA AREA ON PLOT NO. 6845/71, NAIROBI
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed construction of a petroleum and vehicle service station.
The proposed development entails construction of a petroleum and vehicle service station comprising of:
Construction of the petroleum station building block.
Laying of fuel tanks and pipes.
Construction of a fuel points, driveway, sidewalk and parking lot.
Development utilities (water, drainage, electricity etc.).
Site landscaping.

The proposed project is located approximately 30 Kilometers from Nairobi Central Business District on Plot No. 6845/71 in Embakasi, Utawala area. The plot size is 2 ½ acres.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Minimize vegetation disturbance


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area to be affected.


Possible impacts 


Mitigation measures 


 


Specify locations for trailers and equipment and areas of the site which should be kept free of traffic, equipment and storage.


 


Designate access routes and parking within the site.


 


Preserve of some individual trees within the site.


 


Introduction of vegetation (trees, shrubs and grass) on open spaces and their maintenance.


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


Surface runoff and roof water shall be harvested and stored in underground reservoir for reuse.
A storm water management plan that minimizes impervious area infiltration by use of recharge areas and use of detention and/or retention with graduated outlet control structure will be designed.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.


Increased solid waste generation


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: a) source reduction b) recycling c) composting and reuse d) combustion e) sanitary land filling.
Through accurate estimation of the sizes and quantities of materials required, order materials in the sizes and quantities they will be needed, rather than cutting them to size or having large quantities of residual materials.
Ensure that construction materials left over at the end of construction will be used in other project rather than being disposed of.
Ensure that damaged or wasted construction materials including plumbing and lighting fixtures, marbles and glass will be recovered for refurbishing and use in other projects.
Donate recyclable/reusable or residual materials to local community groups, institutions and individual local residents or home owners.


Reduce dust emissions


Ensure strict enforcement of onsite speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Safety gear should be provided.


Exhaust emission


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized.
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Sensitize truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/offloading points and parking areas and to switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points.


Possible impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Minimization of noise and vibration


Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitize construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, residential areas and schools.
Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation.
Ensure that all generators and heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.


Minimize occupational health and safety risks


Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the premises.
Suitable overalls, safety footwear, dust masks, gas masks, respirators, gloves, ear protection equipment etc. Should be made available and construction personnel must be trained to use the equipment.
Implement all necessary measures to ensure health and safety of workers and the general public during operation of the housing project as stipulated in Factories and other places of work Act Cap 514.
Well stocked first aid box which is easily available and accessible should be provided within the premises.
Firefighting equipment such as fire extinguishers should be provided at strategic locations such as stores and construction areas.
Regular inspection and servicing of the equipment must be undertaken by a reputable service provider and records of such inspections maintained.
Signs such as “NO SMOKING” must be prominently displayed within the premises especially in parts where inflammable materials are stored.


Air, soil, groundwater and surface water bodies contamination


Construct an oil/water separator and contain all the oil effluent from the motor workshop before appropriate disposal.


 


Construct appropriate drainage system within fuel delivery and dispensing areas to divert all oil/fuel spills to the constructed oil/water separator.


 


Construct appropriate peripheral surface drainage system around the motor workshop to control surface run-off by diverting all storm water and prevent it from contamination with oil effluent.


 


Ensure that all fuel dispensers (pumps) are fitted with leak proof drip tray to ensure that product from small internal leaks flows onto the forecourt surface where it can be noticed and diverted to the oil/water separator.


 


All installations including dispensers, storage tanks and pipework should be well maintained and checked regularly for integrity and any defective installation be removed and replaced appropriately.


Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


 


Fuel tank repairs should be done regularly by suitably trained and competent personnel and the repaired tanks leak-tested before reinstallation.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Nairobi Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Embakasi and Makadara Districts.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1662100            National Environment Management Authority.

