
				Page: 851GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3271
JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION
VACANCIES FOR THE OFFICE OF JUDGE OF SUPREME
 COURT OF KENYA
The Judicial Service Commission of Kenya invites applications from qualified persons for the following positions in the Judiciary:
JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT—5 POSTS
Ref:.—V/No.  3/2011
Terms of Service.—Constitutional Office
Period of service.—Retirement at the age of 70 years with an election to retire on attaining the age of 65 years.
Functions.—A Judge of the Supreme Court shall serve in the Supreme Court of Kenya and shall exercise the following functions:
(a) Have exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine disputes relating to the elections of the Office of the President arising under article 140, and
(b) To hear and determine in its appellate Jurisdiction appeals from (i) Court of Appeal and (ii) Any other Court or tribunal as prescribed by the National Legislature.
(c)  Given an Advisory opinion at the request of the national government, any state organ, or any county government with respect of any matter concerning county government.
Constitutional and statutory requirements for Appointment
For appointment to the position of Judge of the Supreme Court, the applicants must possess the following qualification:
(a) At least fifteen (15) years experience as a superior court Judge; or
(b) At least fifteen (15) years experience as a distinguished academic, judicial officer, legal practitioner or such experience in other relevant legal field; or
(c)  Held the qualification specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) for a period amounting, in aggregate, to fifteen years (experience gained in Kenya or in another Commonwealth common law jurisdiction will be considered).
(d) Have a high moral character, integrity and impartiality.  (In addition to the above qualifications, the applicants must demonstrate a high degree of professional competence, communication skills, fairness, good temperament, making of good judgements in both legal and life experiences and commitment to public and community service).
The appointments shall be made in accordance with Article 166 (3) (a), (b) and (c) of the Constitution of Kenya.
Interested and qualified persons are requested to make their applications by forwarding the following:-
A letter of application,
A detailed and updated curriculum vitae summarizing the applicant’s bio-data including, background information, (such as community service, financial discipline, pro bono activity, involvement as a party in litigation and involvement in political activity including any financial contribution to any political party/parties and criminal record) legal practice/engagement for the last five (5) years, three (3) professional referees and two (2) character references who can verify and comment on the applicant’s past and present employment,
Completed application for employment forms in triplicate—JCS 2A (for public officers) or JSC 2 (for other applicants),
Five (5) samples of any writings by the applicant, including but not limited to judgements, scholarly writings or any legal publications that the applicant has authored,
The applicant’s three recent coloured passport size photographs,
Declaration of income and liabilities as at the time of making the application using the prescribed form (The Declaration of Income, Assets and Liabilities Form JSC 2b).  For those in Government employment, attach copies of returns of declaration of income and liabilities and for those in private practice attach income tax returns, for the last three (3) years,
Certified copies of testimonials and professional certificates and academic transcripts.
To:   The Secretary,
Judicial Service Commission,
P.O. Box 30041–00100
NAIROBI
Email: reghck@judiciary.go.ke
So as to reach the Commission within a period of twenty-one (21) days from the date of this advertisement.
The JSC 2A and JSC 2 Forms and the Declaration of Income and Assets Forms are available free of charge at the Commission’s Secretary/Registrar’s Chambers, Room No. 10 at the High Court Building, Nairobi during office hours.  The forms can also be downloaded from the Judiciary’s website – www.judiciary.go.ke
Only shortlisted and successful candidates will be contacted.
Canvassing in any form will lead to automatic disqualification.
The Judicial Service Commission is an Equal Opportunity Employer and selects candidates on merit, through fair and open competition, from the widest range of eligible candidates.
Dated the 30th March, 2011.
L. A. ACHODE,
Secretary,
Judicial Service Commission.

