
				Page: 1151GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2238
CLARIFICATION OF FUNCTIONS AS EXERCISED BY THE  NATIONAL AND COUNTY GOVERNMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FOURTH SCHEDULE OF THE CONSTITUTION
IT IS notified for the general information of the  public that following the meeting and resolution of the Board of Transitional Authority held on the 22nd January, 2016, the board clarifies the functions to be exercised by both the National Government and the County Governments in the following Schedule:
SCHEDULE
1. Natural Resources
A Water Resources Management Authority.
Functions listed as per the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution. 
Unbundled ( National)
Unbundled (County)
1. The use of international waters and water resources
Exercised through—
N/A
 
(a)developing principles, guidelines, and procedures for allocation of water resources;
 
 
(b)monitoring and reassess the National Water Resources Management Strategy;
 
 
(c)  receiving and determining water permit applications for ground and surface water abstraction, use and recharge;
 
 
(d)determining, issuing and varing water permits and enforce permit conditions;
 
 
(e)  issuance of permits for inter-basin water transfer;
 
 
(f)   determining charges to be imposed for the use of water from any water resource;
 
 
(g)formulating and enforcing standards, procedures and regulations for the management and use of water resources and flood mitigation;
 
 
(h)coordinating with counties, national and international bodies for the better regulation of the management and use of water resources.
 
2. Consumer Protection 
Exercised through—
 
 
(a)regulating and protecting water resources quality from adverse impacts (water quality and pollution control aspects);
 
 
(b)enforcing of water quality standards;
 
 
(c)  issuance of water abstraction permits to ensure equitable utilization; 
 
 
(d)monitoring, evaluating, varing and enforcing permit conditions.
 
3.  National Public Works
Exercised through—
 
 
(a)issuance of permits for inter-basin water transfer (inter-county);
 
 
(b)issuance of authorizations and permits for construction of reservoirs for impounding surface run-off and regulating stream flows to synchronize them with water demand patterns;
 
 
(c)  issuance of authorization and permits for water works, bulk distribution and provision of water services; and
 
 
(d)issuance of permits for development of National Public Water Works for water resources storage.
 
4.Water protection, securing sufficient residual water, hydraulic engineering and the safety of dams
Exercised through—
 
 
(a)regulating and protecting water resources from adverse impacts;
 
 
(b)managing and protecting water catchments; and
 
 
(c)  issuance of authorizations with conditions for construction of water resources management infrastructure.
 
5. Disaster management
Exercised through—
 
 
(a)capacity building for management of floods and drought;
 
 
(b)provision of information and advice to the Cabinet Secretary for formulation of policy on national water resources management, water storage and flood management strategies;
 
 
(c)  gathering and maintaining of information on water resources and from time to time publish forecasts, and projections; 
 
 
(d)enhancing water resources knowledge base through acquisition of hydrological, meteorological, water quality, and groundwater monitoring data;
 
 
(e)  developing Basin Planning Decision Support Systems (DSS);
 
 
(f)   developing integrated river basin/sub catchment flood and drought management plans;
 
 
(g)supporting development of sub-catchment/river-basin Management plans; and
 
 
(h)automating water resources network, collect, analyze and disseminate data for Decision Support Systems.
 
B Water Services Regulatory Board
Functions as listed as per the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution  (Part 1 and 2)
Unbundled
1. Protection of the environment and natural resources with a view to establishing a durable and sustainable system of development.
(a)licensing of water utilities; 
2. Water protection
(b)standards setting; 
3. Hydraulic engineering  
(c)  monitoring;
4. Consumer protection. 
(d)enforcement;
 
(e)  enforcement of social tariffs;
 
(f)   standards of goods and services of a reasonable quality;
 
(g)information on the services;
 
(h)protection of health and economic interest;
 
(i)   dissemination of standards;
 
(j)   monitoring of standards;
 
(k)  enforcement of Standards; 
 
(l)   reporting on the progress in the standards  and on the progressive realisation of the right to water as per the National Water Services Strategy; and
 
(m)provision of information to public on their rights.
C Water Services Trust Fund
Functions as listed as per the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution (Part 1 and 2)
Unbundled
Capacity building and technical assistance
Capacity building to the counties with technical support, mapping, pro poor targeting and management applications for efficiency and effective service delivery.
Public Investment
Resource mobilize from 90 per cent Development Partners for direct project investment and 10 per cent GOK funding for administration.
 
Support being channeled directly to—
 
(a)     WRUAs with technical support from WRMA in line with Water Act, 2002;
 
(b)     soil and water conservation; and
 
(c)      forestry.
 
Financial support to rural and urban WSP to develop, manage and implement water and sanitation access. 
 
Mainstreaming environmental sustainability internally and external operations by operationalizing WSTF Environmental Policy.
Economic and social rights
Financial support to rural and urban WSP to develop, manage and implement water and sanitation access.
Chapter 5 
Financial support to WRUAs to ensure sustainable water resource management through encouraging public participation and prevent degradation.
Land and Environment Part 2
 
Environment and Natural Resources
 
D. National Water Conservation and Pipeline Corporation
Functions as listed as per the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution (Part 1 and 2)
Unbundled
Capacity building and technical assistance
Capacity building to the counties with technical support, mapping, pro poor targeting and management applications for efficiency and effective service delivery.
Public Investment
Resource mobilize from 90 per cent Development Partners for direct project investment and 10 per cent GOK funding for administration.
 
Support being channeled directly to—
 
(a)     WRUAs with technical support from WRMA in line with Water Act, 2002;
 
(b)     soil and water conservation; and
 
(c)      forestry.
 
Financial support to rural and urban WSP to develop, manage and implement water and sanitation access. 
 
Mainstreaming environmental sustainability internally and external operations by operationalizing WSTF Environmental Policy.
Economic and social rights
Financial support to rural and urban WSP to develop, manage and implement water and sanitation access.
Chapter 5 
Financial support to WRUAs to ensure sustainable water resource management through encouraging public participation and prevent degradation.
Land and Environment Part 2
 
Environment and Natural Resources
 
E .Water Appeal Board
Functions
Unbundled
Consumer protection, including standards for social security and professional pension plans
Exercised through—
(a)  hearing of appeals arising from disputes in the water sector involving decisions and orders of Water Resources Management Authority, Minister, Water Services Regulatory Board, Water Services Boards, Water Service Providers, Water Resource User Association and other stakeholders; and
(b)  hearing of disputes/cases on tariffs, licenses, billings, permits, etc.
F . Water Service Boards
 
Functions as listed as per the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution (Part 1 and 2)
Unbundled (National)
1. The use of international water and water resources
Exercised through—
 
(a)      negotiation of co-operation and management agreements for utilization of international waters;
 
(b)      formulation of policies governing the use of  trans-boundary water resources, including river Nile;
 
(c)      negotiation of management agreements for utilization of shared/ trans-boundary water resources, including the Nile Basin;
 
(d)      monitoring and reporting on the  implementation of the agreements and conventions on the use of international water and trans-boundary water resources;
 
(e)      formulation of national policy on the use and management of water resources;
 
(f)       negotiation of basin management agreements for utilization of waters resources i.e. water catchment area conservation, control, Management, use and protection, including the Mara Basin;
 
(g)      implementation of National Programs for sustainable use of water resources that are basin/cross-county in nature;
 
(h)      implementation of basin management agreements; 
 
(i)       abstraction from water resources;
 
(j)       formulation of national waste water management policy including effluent standards, sewage conveyance and treatment and disposal policy;
 
(k)      regulation of integrated water resources management and conservation; 
 
(l)       monitoring and reporting on;
 
(a)      abstraction;
 
(ii)  implementation of the water   resource management policy;
 
(iii)  basin management agreements  for utilization of waters resources;
 
(iv) restoration of strategic water towers and river/lake basins, including Restoration of Lake Naivasha Basin initiative, Mau ranges, Aberdares etc.;
 
(v)  implementation of National water public works for water supply to meet the constitutional requirements for progressive realization of the Right to Water. This includes:
 
·    national water resources (Dams,  intake structures);
 
·    national/bulk water Production facilities (treatment);
 
·    bulk Water transmission facilities (tunnels and large pipelines); and
 
·    bulk storage reservoirs.
2. National economic policy and planning
Exercised through—
 
(a)      development of National Water and Sewerage Master Plans pursuant to the state’s obligation for progressive realization of the Right to Water. These are—
 
(i) national water master plans; 
 
(ii) national sewerage master plan;
 
(iii) national water resource master plan;
 
(b)     development of basin water and sewerage master plans pursuant to the state’s obligation for progressive realization of the right to Water. These are—
 
(i) basin water master plans; 
 
(ii) basin  sewerage master plan;
 
(c)      implementation of National and Basin Water and Sewerage Master Plans(Concurrent);
 
(d)      monitoring and evaluation of sector performance and benchmarks (Concurrent).
3. National Public Works.
Exercised through—
 
(a)      planning for National Water and Sanitation Public Works pursuant to the state’s obligation for progressive realization of the right to safe Water and adequate sanitation;
 
(b)      mobilization of resources including finances, for  Water and Sanitation Public Works;
 
(c)      implementation of National Water and Sanitation Public Works;
 
(d)      management/supervision and maintenance of National Water and Sanitation Public Works  including asset management, asset inventory and valuation; and
 
(e)                monitoring, evaluation and reporting on the progress of National Public Works.
4. Protection of the environment and natural resources with a view to establishing a durable and sustainable system of development, including water protection, securing sufficient residual water, hydraulic engineering and the safety of dams
Exercised through—
 
(a)      National legislation on protection of the environment and sustainable development of natural resources (including benefit sharing);
 
(b)      development of a national strategy for protection and management of water resources;
 
(c)      implementation of the national strategy for protection and management of water resources including effluents to river courses (Concurrent);
 
(d)      controlled and equitable allocation of water abstraction rights and water use (securing sufficient residual water);
 
(e)      development of dams and other water storage facilities as water supply sources (hydraulic engineering) (concurrent);
 
(f)       Flood control (hydraulic engineering) Build up areas drainage in counties (concurrent);
 
(g)      Land reclamation(concurrent);
 
(h)      development of national standards for construction, safety and monitoring systems for dams and hydraulic engineering;
 
(i)       implementation of national policy and legislation on the protection of the environment and sustainable development of natural resources (concurrent);
 
(j)       planning and development of bulk water supply systems (hydraulic engineering ) (concurrent);
5. Disaster management
Exercised through—
 
(a)      formulation of a National Disaster Management Policy on water security and management;
 
(b)      implementation of the National Disaster Management Policy on water security (damages, shortages, pollution, floods, drought)and management;
 
(c)      monitoring water infrastructure systems, ensuring critical infrastructure is secure ( dam safety) and  reliability of bulk water supply systems. (concurrent).
6. Capacity building and technical assistance to the counties
Exercised through—
 
(a)      development of collaboration and consultation mechanisms to facilitate counties to undertake their mandate; 
 
(b)      development of benchmarks and standards for performance  of county functions; 
 
(c)      mobilize financing for and implement capacity building activities for counties on water service provision;
 
(d)      develop reserve  capacity and expertise to step-in and provide technical support to counties;
 
(e)      implementation of capacity building programs and activities and provision of technical assistance;
 
(f)       monitoring, evaluation and reporting on the performance of county government functions.
7. Residual
Exercised through—
 
(a)      implementation of special projects and programs in line with the State’s obligation towards progressive realization of the right to water, including drought mitigation, pro-poor initiatives, national water harvesting and storage program;
 
(b)      research and development, service innovation; 
 
(c)      resource conflict management;
 
(d)      rain water harvesting and storage;
 
(e)      step-in obligation pursuant to Article 190(3) of the Constitution;
 
(f)       rapid assessment of projects, initial feasibility and packaging of ready projects.
For avoidance of doubt, the following functions have been transferred to the county governments in the water sector.
Function as listed in Part 2 of the Fourth Schedule
Perfomed by the county governments through
1. Implementation of specific National Government policies on natural resources and environmental conservation, including soil and water conservation
(a)  implementation of specific national government policy related to water conservation; and
 
(b)  monitoring and reporting on implementation of specific policies related to natural resources and environment conservation in accordance with national Monitoring & Evaluation framework.
2. County public works and services, including—
(a)  development of county policy on water services in accordance with National Water Policy and National Water Services Strategy;
(a)     storm water management systems in built-up areas; and
(c)   development of county legislation on water services in accordance with the nationalpolicies, norms and standards;
(b)     water and sanitation services
(d)  implementation of policy and legislation (both National and County) related  to water and sanitation services;  
 
(e)   APPOINTMENT and monitoring of Water Service Providers (WSPs) in line with national guidelines; 
 
(f)    enforcement of legislation, regulations and standards (both at National and County level) related to water and sanitation services;
 
(g)  planning  for county public works related to water services and sanitation to meet demand;
 
(h)  mobilization of resources for county public works related to water and sanitation services;
 
(i)    implementation of county public works related to water and sanitation  services;
 
(j)    implementation of pro-poor interventions in accordance with national guidelines;
 
(k)   asset management, maintenance, inventory and valuation of county public works related to water and sanitation;
 
(l)    rapid assessment of projects, initial feasibility and packaging of ready projects.
2. Functions of Regional Development Authorities
The following functions as captured under the second column hitherto performed by Regional Development Authorities is transferred to all the county governments.
Note.—The management of all ongoing projects and programmes covering the stated functions be handed over to the respective county governments together with the staff and other resources undertaking the functions as listed.
 
Function as listed in Part 1 of the Fourth Schedule
National Government (Unbundled components)
Function as listed in Part 2 of the Fourth Schedule
County Government (unbundled)
1. Paragraph 21 of Part 1 of the Fourth Schedule: General principles of land planning and the co-ordination of planning by the counties 
The Regional Development Authorities functions:
Agriculture, including—
(a)    establishment of tree nurseries;
1.     Prepare and cause implementation of Integrated Regional Development Master Plans.
(a) crop and animal husbandry;
(b)    animal husbandry extension services;
 
 (b) livestock sale yards;
(c)     agricultural extension services;
 
(c) county abattoirs;
(d)    construction of water pans;
 
(d) plant and animal disease control; and
(e)     horticultural development;
 
(e) fisheries.
(f)      farmer Extension components relating to technology transfer in Fish farming;
 
 
(g)    Irrigation components;
 
 
(h)    tree seedlings-production and planting;
 
 
(i)      brick making;
 
 
(j)      beekeeping – (outside buffer zone and riparian zones) and refinery;
 
 
(k)     livestock fattening/finishing and marketing; and
 
 
(l)      AI extension services. 
2. Paragraph 9 of Part 1 of the Fourth Schedule:
2.    Promote and improve economic performance and enhance the regions' competitiveness through identification of regional resources, investment opportunities and development priorities.
 
 
National economic policy and planning. 
3.    Initiate, plan and Implement basin-based integrated development programmes and projects for sustainable utilization of natural resources in the Area including the  abstraction and use of the same
3. Paragraph 22 of Part 1 of the Fourth Schedule:  Protection of the environment and natural resources with a view to establishing a durable and sustainable system of development, including, water protection, securing sufficient residual water, hydraulic engineering, the safety of dams; and energy policy. 
4.    Develop and manage sustainable multipurpose dams in the Area.
Paragraph 33 of Part 1 of the Fourth Schedule:
5.    Monitor and evaluate basin-based integrated development programmes and projects within the Area for effective implementation and future planning.
Public investment. 
6.    Establish and manage an up to-date river basin natural resource data and information system necessary for planning and development of the Area.
 
7.    Provide advisory services to the national government and other institutions on the resource based development and investment opportunities in the Area.
 
8.    Develop a broad consultative and collaborative framework with the private sector, development partners and other appropriate agencies in the development of the Area through—
 
(a) basin-based resource studies;
 
(b) knowledge and information sharing; and
 
(c) technology transfer and capacity building.
 
9.    Initiate, plan, promote, implement and manage sustainable integrated  resource based investments.
 
10.Develop a broad consultative and collaborative framework with the private sector, development partners and other appropriate agencies in the development of the Area.
 
11.Undertake resource mobilization and investment through Public Private Partnership, implementation of value addition and income generating projects.
 
12.Co-ordinate, liaise and work with other relevant agencies in the exploration, development and protection of the fishery and other marine resources in the exclusive economic zone of Kenya.
 
13.Advise on, and provide technical support in the implementation of any agreement or other arrangement between Kenya and other states relating to the use of the waters of Lake Victoria or the river Nile.
 
14.Implement National Government Strategic programmes and perform other related functions and activities as may be necessary to promote and sustain the socio-economic development in the Area.
 
15.Undertake programmes and projects that promote resolution of basin-based resource use conflicts.
 
16.Advise and provide technical support to the counties.
 
17.Liaise and work with the counties in the development and implementation of regional development projects and programmes.
 
 
Implementation of specific national government policies on natural
(a)  terracing;
resources and environmental conservation, including—
(b)  Soil and water conservation;
(a)  soil and water conservation; and
(c)  domestic water supply.
(b)   forestry.
 
3. LAND FUNCTIONS
A PHYSICAL PLANNING FUNCTIONS
 
Functions as Listed in the Fourth Schedule 
National Government
County Government
General principles of Land Planning (Physical Planning)
(a)preparation of Land Use Policy;
Implementation of  policies in line with the National Government.
 
(b)development of Human Settlements Strategies;
 
 
(c)  preparation of guidelines, manuals and standards;
 
 
(d)providing  guidance on proper Institutional Structures for handling Physical Planning and Urban Development;
 
 
 developing strategies and promotion of eco-planning practices;
 
 
(e)  provide general advisory services on all matters of Physical Planning;
 
 
(f)   conduct research on physical planning matters;
 
 
(g)developing Strategies and Promotion of eco- planning practices.
 
Capacity building and technical assistance
Preparation and dissemination of physical planning manuals and guidelines to standardize the practice of physical planning in all counties. Preparation of physical planning manuals and guidelines to standardize the practice of physical planning in all counties. 
 
 
 
 
 
Plan Preparation
County Physical Development Plans: 
 
(a)      preparation  and   approval of the National  Physical Development Plan;
To provide an overall spatial development framework for the county, interpret and localize national and regional policies and strategies and provide a basis for a balanced urban and rural development. It includes,
 
(b)      provide a framework for preparation of Regional Physical Development Plans;  
Local physical development plans to provide a framework  for development, redevelopment or renewal, guide development of infrastructure, regulates the use and development of land in a city , municipality, town, rural or market centre.
 
(c)       preparation of physical plan for reserved public land held by national government;
 
 
(d)      preparation of  frameworks to guide the siting of Public and Private investment projects of national importance;
 
 
(e)       preparation of Plans to facilitate alienation of land held by the National Government;
 
 
(f)        preparation of physical development plan for special projects, including,
 
 
Special Economic Zones, Resort Cities, Techno cities and Industrial parks;
 
 
(g)      preparation of thematic plans to facilitate acquisition of land for National projects including transport corridors.
 
 
Development Control
Development Control
 
 Quality control in line with the defined norms and standards of physical planning.
Regulate the orderly planning and growth of urban and rural areas. 
Regulation of the Physical Planning Profession
(a)     register all eligible persons to practice as physical planners;
 
 
(b)     review, harmonize and set guidelines for accreditation of planning curricula in Kenya;
 
 
(c)      set guidelines and conduct continuous professional development for graduates and registered planners;
 
 
(d)     enquire into professional misconduct of a member and institute disciplinary proceedings against such a member.
 
B. LAND ADMINISTRATION FUNCTION
 
National Government
County Government
1.    Formulation of land administration and management policy and legislation.
1.    Formulation of specific county policy on land administration  in line with  the national government policy.
2.    Administration and management of land in collaboration with the county government and other agencies.
2.    Implementation of land policies.
3.    Collection of land rents, stamp duty, fees and charges.
3.    Approval of land development proposals.
4.    Preparation of land leases on behalf of National and County Governments.
4.    Recommendation for approval of extension and renewal of leases.
5.    Provision of technical advice on land matters to the Government and other agencies.
5.    Enforce compliance with special conditions on land leases.
6.    Co-ordinate the implementation of land administration and management related policies.
6.    Collection of land rates.
7.    Approval of extension and renewal of leases.
 
8.    Approval of alienation of National Government land.
 
C LAND REGISTRATION FUNCTION.
National Government
County Government
1.    Registration of all documents for all land transactions, under the various land Registration Statutes including Transfers, Charges and Mortgages, Probate.
Approval of development proposals, including subdivisions, amalgamations, change of user, partition and compliance  certificate.
2.    Registration of documents including Deed polls, Floor plans, Deeds of rectification, Powers of Attorney, Agreements, Indemnities.
 
3.    Preparation and processing of various registrable documents, issuance of Title Deeds and Certificates of Title for all categories of land registered under the various land registration statutes.
 
4.    Issuance of searches.
 
5.    Issuance of relevant consents.
 
6.    Preparation of provisional and replacement titles as by law provided.
 
7.    Preparation and issuance of certificates of incorporation under the Trustees (Perpetual Succession) Act (Chapter 164).
 
8.    Maintaining manual and electronic records and allowing access on request.
 
9.    Assessment and stamping of instruments with the requisite Stamp Duty under the Stamp Duty Act (Chapter 480).
 
10.Inspection and control of Duty Franking Machines.
 
11.Hearing and determining land boundary and other land disputes.
 
12.Hearing of removal of cautions, restrictions and other encumbrances.
 
13.Offering both technical and legal advice to the Attorney- General, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission and other commissions whenever sought.
 
14.Registration of sectional properties.
 
D VALUATION FUNCTION
National Government
County Government
1.      Revenue collection.
1. Revenue collection by county governments.
2.      Stamp duty.
2. Valuation for rating
3.      Valuation for rental. 
 
4.      assessment upon subdivision, change of user and lease extension.
 
5.      Government purchase/sale/book purposes/ insurance etc) for—
 
(a)    national government; 
 
(b)    parastatals/cor-porations;
 
(c)    foreign missions  including Embassies and High Commissions.
 
6.      Valuation for Government leasing by the National Government, parastatals/ corporations and other state organs as well as the county governments  for standardization purposes.
 
7.      Management of the Valuers Registration Board established under section 3 of the Valuers Act.
 
8.      Management of the Estates Registration Board.
 
9.      Valuation for probate purposes.
 
10.   Valuation for compulsory land acquisition.
 
11.   Valuation of Government assets. 
 
E LAND ADJUDICATION AND SETTLEMENT FUNCTIONS
National Government
County Government
Land Adjudication
1.    Identification of land for adjudication.
1.    Mobilization of resources for land adjudication and settlement programmes.
2.    Mobilization and sensitization of communities for land adjudication. 
2.    Provide technical advice on land adjudication and settlement.
3.    Mobilization of additional resources.
3.    Policy, legal framework and enforcement of regulation and standards for land adjudication and settlement programmes.
4.    Preparation of the County status report on land adjudication and settlement programmes.
4.    Oversight role on land adjudication and settlement programmes.
5.    Administration and management of group ranches.
5.    Preparation of national programme for land adjudication.
 
6.    Gazettement of Land Adjudication areas and officers.
 
7.    Revenue collection.
 
8.    Staff recruitment, development and deployment.
 
9.    Clearance and issuance of authority to declare adjudication sections.
 
10.Issuance of Certificates of Finality of adjudication sections.
 
11.Registration of adjudication sections for titling.
 
12.Maintenance of national land adjudication information.
 
13.Acquisition of maps,  satellite imageries and adjudication records.
 
14.Custody of Final Adjudication Register.
 
15.   Preparation of the national status report on land adjudication and settlement programmes.
 
16.Monitoring and evaluation of land adjudication and settlement programmes.
 
17.Implementation of land adjudication programmes.
 
Settlement of landless
1.  Mobilization and sensitization of communities for settlement programme.
1.      Mobilization of resources.
2.  Mobilization of additional resources.
2.      Staff recruitment , development and deployment.
 
3.      Acquisition  of land for settlement schemes.
 
4.      Approval of beneficiaries, issuance of letters of offer and documentation of settlers.
 
5.      Registration of settlement schemes for issuance of title-deeds.
 
6.      Collection of Settlement Fund Trustee loans and charges.
 
7.      Management of National data on land adjudication and settlement.
 
8.      Oversight role on identification and placement of beneficiaries.
 
9.      Enforcement of settlement Regulations.
 
10.   Planning of settlement schemes.
 
11.   Survey and demarcation of settlement plots.
 
12.   Identification and placement of beneficiaries.
 
13.   Implementation of settlement programmes.
 
F HOUSING FUNCTIONS
National Government
County Government
The Constitution designates the National Government to undertake research and related activities under Articles - 6(3), 11(2)(b)(c); and specifically the Fourth Schedule (Part1 – 12, 14, 16, 20, 24, and 32). 
(a)provision of land for ABMT development; 
The ABMT (Appropriate Building Materials and Technology) function at the National Government level entails—
(b)participating in the management of ABMT Centres;
(a)development and promotion of affordable housing policy;
(c)  establishment of ABMT Centres.
(b)facilitation and coordination of actors towards delivery of affordable and adequate housing;
(d)localization of ABMT training manual;
(c)  promote appropriate forms of housing delivery through Public Private Partnership and other emerging housing finance models;
(e)  mobilization of local trainees; and
(d)formulation and continuous updating of the regulatory framework on ABMT;
(f)   facilitate dissemination and uptake of researched and incubated technologies.
(e)  establishment of ABMT centres to facilitate—
 
·    capacity building; 
 
·    collaborative research and documentation;
 
·    technology incubation and enterprise development; and
 
·    technology transfer through capacity building trainings and dissemination;
 
(f)   preparation of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on collaborative research, technology incubation and enterprise development and capacity building with various strategic partners;
 
(g)incubation of viable local technologies and reverse engineering of other technologies;
 
(h)facilitating branding, standardization and quality control on application of ABMT;
 
(i)   co-ordination and management of inventory for accredited ABMT professionals, technicians and artisans;
 
(j)   development of curriculum and manuals on ABMT trainings and user application processes;
 
(k)  development of short courses on ABMT and green building application;
 
(l)   monitoring and evaluation for feedback.
 
Housing Policy Management 
(a)domesticate the National Housing Policy ;
(a)policy formulation;
(b)implement the Housing Policy;
(b)monitoring and auditing the implementation of the policy;
(c)  conduct county specific housing surveys;
(c)  conducting and dissemination of national housing survey findings;
(d)institute mechanisms for availing land for housing development including land banking;
(d)periodic review and evaluation of national  housing policy;
(e)  planning and development of housing;
(e) development of a framework and support to counties in cascading of National Housing Policy;
(f)   housing infrastructure development; and
(e)  formulation of housing standards;
(g)mobilize funds for infrastructure development.
(f)   provision of housing basic services to support national projects;
 
(g)mobilize funds for infrastructure development.
 
Management of Building and Construction standards and codes
Monitoring the compliance of regulations and standards in their respective counties.
Formulation of building Regulations and standards.
 
National Secretariat for Human Settlement
Implement the habitat agenda and other international decisions and conventions  on human settlement to which Kenya is party.
(a)co-ordination of national secretariat for human settlement;
 
(b)co-ordinate the implementation of the UN-Habitat resolutions and agenda;
 
(c)  co-ordinate Kenya’s input in housing and human settlements issues in Africa through the AU STC No. 8.
 
(d)facilitate Kenya’s contribution towards the work of Shelter Afrique in Africa.
 
KISIP
Implementation of projects in the selected 15 municipalities.
(subject to the existing conditions in the financing agreement with World Bank)
(a)identification, implementation and management of projects in slums;
Co-ordination of projects in 15 selected municipalities as per the existing terms of agreement.
(b)prevention of slum proliferation and up-grading of existing slums;
 
(c)  up-date county slum registry;
 
(d)formation and management of housing co-operatives in slums.
Slum upgrading
 
(a)co-ordinate formulation, implementation,review and monitoring of National Slum Up-grading and Prevention Policies;
 
(b)co-ordinate the formulation and implementation of regulatory, institutional framework and standards to guide the slum upgrading and prevention initiatives;
 
(c)  co-ordinate establishment  and maintenance of national database of slums and informal settlements;
 
(d)co-ordination of multi-stakeholder support groups on slum upgrading initiatives;
 
(e)  spearhead research on best practices through international collaboration and benchmarking;
 
(f)   co-ordinate local partnerships and lobby international actors in slum upgrading initiatives;
 
(g)co-ordinate fund mobilization and management from development partners;
 
(h)capacity building of the counties and stakeholders and offer technical assistance in slum upgrading  and prevention initiatives;
 
(i)   co-ordinate the development and implementation of cross cutting intervention projects in slums and informal settlements;
 
(j)   co-ordinate implementation of relevant SDG goals, particularly Goal 11 target 1.
 
Management of Housing for Civil Servants and Disciplined Forces
(a)Management and maintenance of houses that belonged to county, municipal and city councils;
(a)maintenance and management of National Government houses—
(b)management of County Government houses(management of institutional houses that are  attached to devolved functions);
·          state houses and lodges; and
(c)  management of rental income for County Government houses;
·          institutional houses;
(d)placement of tenants in County Government houses;
(b)management and maintenance of Civil Servants and Disciplined Forces houses (security buildings);
(e)  rent submission to the national government for the National Government pooled  houses(until assets are shared between the two levels of Government).
(c)  development of houses for Civil Servants and Disciplined Forces;
 
(d)Security of Government houses;
 
(e)  registration of Government houses;
 
(f)   rental income management;
 
(g)allocation of houses in consultation with the County Government;
 
(h)placement of civil servants. 
 
Management of Civil Servants Housing Scheme—
(a)counties to initiate independent mortgage schemes;
(a)development of housing projects for sale/rent;
(b)identification of suitable land for housing development;
(b)management of fund’s estates;
(c)  development of housing projects for sale/rent;
(c)   mobilization of funds for housing development. 
(d)mobilization of funds for housing development.
Public office accommodation and lease management—
(a)maintaining inventory of owned and leased office accommodation;
(a)formulation of office accommodation and leasing policy; 
(b)implementation  of office accommodation and leasing policy; management of office accommodation;
(b)leasing office and residential accommodation for National Government; 
(c)  audit office accommodation;
(c)  management of office accommodation;
(d)lease management.
(d)audit office accommodation;
 
(e)  lease management.
 
Maintenance of Inventory of Government Property—
(a)maintain an inventory of county owned houses; and
(a)maintain an inventory of national government owned houses;
(b)maintain inventory of leased houses and buildings by county.
(b)maintain inventory of leased houses and buildings;
 
(c)  set and ensure quality maintenance standards for all Government houses;
 
(d)mobilize funds for housing development;
 
(e)  creation of housing funds.
 
 
F URBAN DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS
National Government
County Government
National Urban Policy—
(a)implementation of the National Urban Policy;
(a)policy formulation and review;
(b)develop county urban legislation for Urban areas and cities;
(b)development of legislation for Urban areas and Cities;
(c)  ensure quality control and standardization of urban planning and programmes implementation;
(c)  develop Regulations on criteria for and the classification, governance and management of urban areas and cities (urban planning, research, development porgrammes and management);
(d)implement best practices in urban development;
(d)develop regulations  for participation of residents in the governance of urban areas and cities;
(e)  implementation of regulations on criteria for and the classification, governance and management of urban areas and cities;
(e)  develop regulations on principles of governance and management of urban areas and cities;
(f)   facilitate coordination framework meetings to strategize the urban development agenda;
(f)   develop regulation on, standards and guidelines for planning, development control, and urban management standards of urban areas and cities;
(g)facilitate conducting  monitoring and auditing of urban development agenda to guide:
(g)conduct monitoring and auditing of urban development agenda to guide;
·    benchmarking urban development best practices;
·          benchmarking urban development best practices; and 
·    dissemination of national urban policy surveys and findings;
·          dissemination of national urban policy surveys and findings;
(h) facilitate collection of urban data.
(h)  development and operationalization of urban observatory/databank.
 
National Urban Public Works—
Implementation of the strategies for National Urban Public Works, including
(a)formulate strategies for National Urban Public Works;
market hubs, lorry parks, strategic urban roads, strategic bus parks, water schemes, stadia and urban roads.
(b)implement the strategies for National Urban Public Works for Nairobi and special urban cities, including Konza, Kilifi and Isiolo
 
Environmental Protection—
(a)implementation of the strategies for environmental protection; and 
(a)formulate strategies on environmental protection. Target areas being, solid waste management,stormwater drainage and urban sanitation programmes;
(b)facilitate monitoring and auditing of environmental protection programmes.
(b)formulate and implement strategies on urban areas and cities environmental protection;
 
(c)  monitoring and auditing the implementation of the national urban development policy 
 
Disaster Management—
(a)implementation of strategies on disaster management;
(a)formulate and implement  disaster management policy;
(b)facilitate profiling of urban safety areas; and
(b)urban safety profiling at the national level for Nairobi and other special urban areas and cities;
(c)   support monitoring and auditing of implementation programmes.
(c)   monitoring and auditing the implementation of the national urban development policy. 
 
Capacity and Technical Assistance to counties—
(a)implementation of the strategies for capacity building and technical backstopping to counties urban development and urbanization issues; and
(a)formulate and implement capacity building and technical assistance to counties urban development and urbanization issues. (both soft and hard component on urban infrastructure development);
(b)facilitate monitoring and auditing of capacity building and technical backstopping to counties on urban development and urbanization issues.
(b)monitoring and auditing the implementation of capacity building and technical backstopping to counties on urban development and urbanization issues. 
 
Public Investments—
(a)implementation of the strategies for public investment for urban areas and cities; and
(a)formulate public investment strategies for urban areas and cities (These covers the entire urban agenda);
(b)facilitate monitoring and auditing of the strategies for public investment for urban areas and cities.
(b)co-ordinating development partner supported activities in urban and cities;
 
(c)  facilitate co-ordination of inter-sectoral investment in urban areas.
 
4. LAND SURVEYING AND MAPPING FUNCTIONS
County Planning and Development
(a) Land Survey and mapping
(b) Boundaries and fencing
(c)  Housing
 
National Government
County Government
1.    Formulation of survey policy and legislation.
Implementation of policies and guidelines on survey and mapping activities at the county as per the legislation.
2.    Regulation of survey activities.
 
3.    Co-ordinating and overseeing statutory bodies established to regulate surveyors and related professionals.
 
Provision of survey controls
1.    Establishment of a 3rd – 4thorder geodetic controls.
1.    Definition, establishment and maintenance of Kenya Geodetic Reference Frame (KENREF) in line with the International Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF), and as part of the African Geodetic Reference Frame (AFREF).
2.    Provision lower order vertical controls.
2.    Establishment of a National Geodetic Control Network from 1st to 3rd order.
3.    Utilization of modern state of the art National Positioning System (X,Y,Z and t).
3.    Establishment of Real-time Kinematic Continuous Operating Reference Stations Network (RTK CORS Network) and the CORS Centre.
 
4.    Establishment of Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). 
 
5.    Astronomical observations for positioning purposes,
 
6.    Definition, establishment and maintenance of the National Vertical Datum.
 
7.    Gravity and magnetic measurements.
 
8.    Establishment of a national geoidal model.
 
9.    Carrying out crustal  deformation monitoring.
 
10.Photo control for use in preparation of base maps.
 
11.Provision of fundamental vertical controls.
 
International boundary surveys—
County governments bordering neighboring countries to submit reports on status of the international boundaries to the National Novernment.
Survey, inspect and maintain international boundaries. 
 
Provision and maintenance of up to date cadastre
1.    Determination and identification of property boundaries.
1.    Formulation of cadastre policies and Regulations.
2.    Inspection and verification of fencing.
2.    Develop and maintain national cadastral standards.
3.    Setting out of buildings.
3.    Undertake cadastral surveys.
4.    Setting out of road reserves, riparian  reserves, etc.
4.    Establish cadastral information system.
5.    Application of survey standards;
5.    Registration, checking and authentication of surveys,
6.    Providing access to georeferenced survey and mapping data to private and public institutions such as financial institutions, educational institutions, directorate of public works.
6.    Preparation of survey manuals.
7.    Resolution of property boundary disputes (concurrent).
7.    Processing, analysis and dissemination of geospatial data.
8.    Revenue collection.
8.    Verification and maintenance of property registration maps.
9.    Preparation of survey plans and documents.
9.    Custodianship  of all property registration maps.
 
10.Resolution of property boundary disputes.
 
 
Calibration of survey equipment 
Ensure survey equipment procured by the county are calibrated.
1.    Establishment of national calibration bases for all survey and mapping equipment.
 
2.    Certification of survey and mapping equipment.
 
County Boundaries
Submit status reports on the  national boundaries to the National Government 
Survey, inspection and maintenance of county boundaries in collaboration with the county governments.
 
Land Development
Approval of land development proposals. 
Provide advice on land development matters. 
 
Hydrographic Surveys
 
1.    Formulation of hydrographic survey policies and Regulations.
1.        Collect hydrographic data on internal waters within the county.
2.    Develop and maintain national hydrographic survey standards.
 Submit hydrographic data to the Director of surveys.
3.    Preparation of hydrographic  survey manuals.
2.        Disseminate hydrographic data to the public.
4.    Carry out hydrographic surveys.
3.        Costing of hydrographic mapping projects at the county level.
 Checking and authentication of hydrographic surveys
4.        Production of inundation maps for flood monitoring and decision-making.
5.    Custody of all hydrographic survey data.
5.        Survey of water bodies for recreational purposes and monitoring of siltation levels.
6.    Processing, analysis and dissemination of hydrographic data.
6.        Capacity building on hydrography.
7.    Preparation and maintenance of bathymetric charts.
 Implementation of guidelines, standards and policies on hydrography.
8.    Dissemination of hydrographic data.
7.        Sensitization of the public on maritime safety within the county.
9.    Delineation and delimitation of Kenya’s maritime boundaries and zones.
8.        Management of riparian reserves (rivers, lakes) in line with National Government policy.
10.Co-ordination of national and international hydrographic survey activities.
 
11.Calibration, certification and maintenance of hydrographic surveys  equipment.
 
12.Advising the County Government on Hydrographic surveys.
 
13.Provides secretariat to the National Hydrographic and Oceanographic Committee.
 
14.Carrying out marine crustal deformation monitoring survey.
 
 
National Government
County Government
1.        Implementation of United Nations Law  of the Sea and other related international maritime laws.
1.     
2.        Measurement of ocean dynamics including Tidal data, currents, pressure and salinity.
 
3.        Establishment and maintenance of tidal gauges.
 
4.        Harmonization of the hydrographic datum with the national geodetic datum.
 
5.        Estimation and costing of hydrographic mapping projects.
 
6.        Shoreline surveys for oceans and lakes.
 
 
 
 
Photogrammetry
1.    Implementation of photogrammetry policies, standards and Regulations at county level.
1.    Formulation of photogrammetry  policies and Regulations.
2.    Carry out photogrammetric activities at county level.
2.    Develop and maintain national photogrammetry standards.
3.    Submission of photogrammetric datasets to the national database for authentication and archival. 
3.    Preparation of photogrammetric manuals.
4.    Dissemination of photogrammetric data sets at county level.
4.    Carry out national photogrammetric works.
5.    Implementing imagery specifications for county photogrammetric works.
5.    Checking and authentication of photogrammetric works.
6.    Carrying out aerial triangulation and adjustment.
6.    Preparation and maintenance of photogrammetric datasets.
7.    Budgeting and costing of county photogrammetric projects. 
7.    Processing, analysis and dissemination of photogrammetric datasets.
 
8.    Research, acquisition, calibration, maintenance and upgrades of photogrammetric instruments. 
 
9.    Research, development, maintenance and revision of photogrammetric production standards in line with national and international photogrammetric standards.
 
10.Developing, maintaining and enforcing imagery specifications.
 
11.Clearance and Authorization of aerial imagery.
 
12.Carrying out flight planning, aerial photography and satellite imagery acquisition for international boundary corridors.
 
13.Preparation and determination of photo control within international boundary corridors
 
14.Carrying out flight planning, aerial photography and satellite imagery acquisition for national photogrammetric works.
 
15.Carrying out aerial triangulation and adjustment. 
 
16.Photogrammetric data coding and classification.
 
17.Budgeting and costing of photogrammetric projects.
 
18.Monitoring and evaluating the photogrammetric activities at national level.
 
19.Certification of Photogrammetric equipments at national level.
 
20.Controlling dissemination of photogrammetric data sets at national level.
 
21.Certification of Photogrammetric equipments at national level.
 
Cartography
1.    Design, production and updating of inundation maps for flood monitoring and decision-making.
1.    Formulate and review of cartographic policies and Regulations.
2.    Implementing the County Postal codes.
2.    Develop and maintain national cartographic standards.
3.    Production and updating of utility infrastructure maps for purposes of installation of sewers, power lines and water pipes.
3.    Preparation of cartographic manuals.
4.    Collection of primary and secondary data for preparation of topographical base maps.
4.    Processing, analysis and dissemination of cartographic data.
5.    Drawing of Survey plans and cadastral maps.
5.    Preparation of county boundary maps.
6.    Sale of maps to members of the public.
6.    Production, charting and updating of National Maritime boundary maps and aeronautical charts for safe navigation.
7.    Sensitization of the public on matters relating to boundary maps and cadastral plans.
7.    Participate in international research projects.
8.    Co-ordination of cartographic activities within the county.
8.    Collect, record, analyze, summarize and map statistical information on disaster preparedness and disseminate occurrences, impacts and losses, on a regular basis.
 
9.    Production and updating of utility infrastructure maps for purposes of installation of sewers, power lines, water pipes etc.
 
10.Contribution to the production of the Global   and other international maps.
 
11.Overseeing of research on new and emerging technologies.
 
12.Production and updating of International and National series of navigation charts.
 
13.Contribution to the Regional Marine Spatial Data Infrastructure.
 
14.Collaboration and co-ordination of the activities of the International Cartographic Organization.
 
15.Harmonization of the National Gazetteer on Geographic Names with the International Gazetteers.
 
16.Scheming of both International and National Series of charts- Determination of scales.
 
17.Mapping and maintenance of Kenya’s Maritime boundaries and Zones including Territorial Waters, Exclusive Economic Zone and Extended Continental Shelf.
 
18.Develop and implement the World Postal codes to speed the sorting and processing of mail by assigning unique numeric or alphanumeric codes to each geographical locality.
 
19.Dissemination of Maritime safety information to Mariners in form of up to date Navigational Charts.
9.     
20.Collaboration with other international Charting Organizations.
 
21.Production of the National Atlas. 
 
22.Design, production and updating of National Topographic, Thematic and Special Maps.
 
23.Compilation, Publication, Co-ordination and Implementation of the National Gazetteer on Geographical Names.
 
24.Co-ordination, Verification and Standardization of data produced by both the public and private organizations for onward transmission to the Kenya National Spatial Data Infrastructure. (KNSDI).
 
25.Design, approval and costing for implementation of national Cartographic projects. 
 
Photolithography
1.    Reproduction and sale of county maps.
1.    Formulate and review of map printing policies and Regulations.
2.    Production of stationery for county consumption, including compliments for the county officers.
2.    Develop and maintain national map printing standards.
3.    Commercial production of magazines, brochures, books and posters so as to generate revenue for the county.
3.    Preparation of map printing manuals.
4.    Printing of county tourist and road maps to show roads and county attraction sites, historical sites and shrines.
4.    Reproduction of Global map used to monitor climate change and global disaster management among other purposes to facilitate the implementation of global agreements and conventions for environmental protection, for monitoring of major environmental phenomena and to encourage economic growth within the context of sustainable development, as part of this objective.
5.    Physical development plans, including roads, buildings printing.
5.    Reproduction, publishing and dissemination of topographical, basic, base and thematic maps.
6.    Dyeline printing of county plans.
 Research of new and emerging printing technologies.
7.    Colour separations, proofing and maintaining survey and mapping equipment.
6.    Production and publishing of Kenya National Atlas and regional Atlases.
8.    Preparing machines for press printing and sorting.
7.    Printing of tourist maps for use by local and international tourists.
9.    Text generations, plate making and trimming.
 Printing of stationery for the various Government ministries e.g folders, calendars, mutation forms, survey checking forms, field notes, cadastral maps.
10.Binding outputs, updating printing records and controlling dissemination of printed outputs. 
8.    Printing of development plans.
11.Enlarging and reducing of imageries, maps, plans and charts.
9.    Commercial printing, including magazine, poster chats, brochures to generate revenue for the Government.
12.Preparing processing solutions image capture, processing of films, planning and designing of manuscripts and layouts.
10.Publishing and production of maps for examinations e.g. educational maps.
 
11.Enlarging and reducing of imageries, maps, plans and charts.
 
12.Preparing processing solutions image capture, processing of films, planning and designing of manuscripts and layouts.
 
13.Binding outputs, updating printing records and controlling dissemination of printed outputs.
 
Geospatial data Management
1.    Collecting, co-ordinating and harmonizing all data captured locally and forwarding to the KNSDI for national/internation-al distribution.
1.    Developing of geospatial processing systems, spatial information policies, GIS software, standards, procedures and user needs. 
2.    Advising the county authorities on the usage of geospatial data for regional development and planning.
2.    Design and maintenance of standards for spatial data capture, processing and analysis in conformity to ISO standards.
3.    Provision of geospatial data to public and professional users.
3.    Integration, verification and approval of spatial data from other providers both at the national and international level to avoid data conflicts resulting from wrong data interpretation.
4.    Liaising with the National team for upcoming modern technologies with respect to geospatial data management.
4.    Advising the service providers on matters related to spatial data capture, availability and access.
5.    Creation, processing, cataloguing and up-dating of 
5.    Provide data access controlling usage of all spatial data to international and national use.
6.    geospatial data records; overseeing research of new and emerging technologies and equipments.
6.    Assessment, converting, analyzing and modeling geospatial data.
7.    Setting out of spatial data systems and LSDI (local spatial data infrastructure).
7.    Creating geospatial database and metadata, maintaining, updating and publishing of metadata.
8.    Digitization, indexing and preservation of  geospatial data.
8.    Development, maintenance and control of National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI).
9.    Cataloguing, querying, developing metadata, and preserving all geospatial records for  public consumption.
9.    Designing of clearinghouse and internet mapping, and manage geospatial information access; securing,  sharing, , estimating , costing and provision of geospatial information.
10.Creating and up-dating geospatial files, cards and registers; indexing, and maintaining backup records and submit to the National Government for inclusion in the KNSDI.
10.Collecting, maintaining, harmonizing, archiving and controlling access of all geo-referenced geospatial data gathered nationally and locally with respect to infrastructure, cadastre, Topography and topology, Hydrography, Oceanography and Celestial.
11.Carrying out geospatial data conversion, checking and archiving of geospatial data from producers.
 Researching and initiating new geospatial data management techniques and publishing metadata.
12.Recording, converting, analyzing and modeling of geospatial data.
11.Supervising the creation and up-dating of geospatial files, cards and registers.
13.Servicing and maintaining geospatial records equipment.
 Maintaining and updating of clearing house and backup records.
14.Supervising the processing, preservation, maintenance, cataloguing, storage, archiving and retrieval of geospatial records; and ensuring the preservation of geospatial records from public and private producers.
12.Supervising transformations, analysis and modeling of geospatial data and advising on the same for better interpretation of spatial data.
 
13.Overseeing servicing, maintenance and up-grade of geospatial data equipment (computers, softwares and servers) for quality control of data.
 
14.Validating the creation and up-dating of spatial data files, cards and registers,  cataloguing; maintaining and up-dating of clearing house and backup.
 
15.Ensuring safe and secure data storage, archiving and retrieval of geospatial data to avoid corruption.
 
16.Estimating and costing of spatial data projects. 
 
17.Advising the National and County physical planners and stake holders on data usage and availability.
 
18.Receiving, registering, capturing, processing, and indexing of Cadastral and utilities geospatial data from public and private producers.
 

19.Maintenance of national survey data backup.

 
 
National Spatial Data Infrastructure (KNSDI)
1.    County Governments to establish SDI with guidelines from the National Government.
1.    Establishment of KNSDI.
2.    Connectivity Networking in County/ Sub-County Offices.
2.    Development of legislation, policy and guidelines on KNSDI.
3.    Data collection for upload to KNSDI.
3.    Development of National Spatial Database Systems.
4.    Establishment of County SDI Centres.
4.    Co-ordination of KNSDI activities.
5.    Spatial Data Collection, processing, maintenance and dissemination to KNSDI centre.
5.    Establish KNSDI Centre.
 
6.    Develop Standards.
 
7.     Develop and maintain Clearing House.
 
8.    Develop Metadata Standards.
 
Regulation of survey and mapping practice.
1.  Ensure compliance with the regulation.
To regulate survey and mapping professionals to ensure quality control (Land surveying, Cadastral surveying, Geodesy, Cartography, Photogrammetry and remote sensing, Photolithography, Hydrography, Geospatial data management systems, Geographical information systems and Astronomy).
2.  Carry out regular surveillance operation of the county survey offices and submit a report  to the board.
 
5. METROPOLIS
 
National Government
County Government
Metropolitan policy and legal framework formulation
Implementation  of metropolitan policy in the counties. 
Development of policies, strategies and guidelines.
Metropolitan boundary delineation
1.    Identify the boundaries of the metropolis.
1.    Set up criteria for identification of metropolitan in consultation with the county governments. 
2.    Creation of the  metropolitan region.
2.    Facilitate establishment of metropolitan regions in the country in consultation with the county governments.
 
Transforming  metropolitan regions into world class metropolis
1.    Establish metropolitan governance systems.
1.    Establish world class governance systems.
2.    Metropolitan safety and security.
2.    Ensuring a safe and secure region.
3.    Enhanced quality of life in the metropolitan region.
3.    Enhancing the quality of life.
4.    Unique image branding in the metropolitan region.
4.    Delivering a unique image and identity through place branding.
 
Metropolitan mobility and transport
1.    Implementation of policy.
Formulate Policy for the mobility and connectivity within Metropolitan areas  and Inter-county connectivity.
 Building of mobility infrastructure. 
Metropolitan social-Infrastructure and enhancing quality of life
Ensuring compliance at the county level with Integrated Metro-wide plans. 
Planning for an integrated of Metro- wide Water and sewerage system.
Metropolitan spatial planning
1.    Preparation of action area plans in conformity with  metro wide spatial plans.
Preparation of metropolitan spatial planning framework.
2.    Implementation of metropolitan spatial planning framework.
Metropolitan spatial data infrastructure
Maintenance and management of spatial and GIS data.
Development of a framework for the management of a metropolitan spatial data infrastructure. 
 
 
6. PUBLIC WORKS FUNCTIONS
National Public Works
County Public Works
National Government
County Government
Public Works Policy
 
1.    Formulation of Public Works policy.
2.    Monitoring and management of implementation of the policy.
Public Works Policy
1.    Implementation of County and National Public works policy.
3.    Formulation of Public Works policy.
2.    Maintain a database on public works survey findings at county level.
4.    Monitoring and management of implementation of the policy.
3.    County public works planning for county specific projects.
5.    Conducting and dissemination of public works survey findings.
Maintain and monitor register of planned public works projects in counties.
Facilitate effective coordination between County Public Works policy and National Public Works policy.
 
6.    National Public works planning for National Government MDAs.
 
7.    Maintain and monitor register of planned public works projects in Government MDAs.
Maintenance of Inventory of Government Buildings and other Public Works
1.    Maintain and inventory of County Government buildings and other county public works.
1.    Maintain an inventory of national government buildings and other national public works.
2.    Monitor inventory of county public works and their adequacy.
2.    Monitor inventory at National level to advice on future public works and maintenance.
3.    Maintain records and drawings of all county public works.
3.    Maintain records and drawings of all National public works and buildings.
 
Development and management of Public Buildings and other Public Works.
1. Offer technical consultancy services to county departments in the following areas: 
1.    Offer technical consultancy services to national government MDAs in the following areas—
(a)  Architecture;
·          Architecture;
(b)Quantity surveying;
·          Quantity surveying;
(c)  Structural Engineering;
·          Structural Engineering;
(d)Civil Engineering;
·          Civil Engineering;
(e)  Electrical and Electronics Engineering;
·          Electrical and Electronics Engineering;
(f)  Mechanical Engineering;
·          Mechanical Engineering;
(g)  Land Surveying.
·          Land Surveying;
2. Provide project management services during construction. 
·          Fire protection;
 
·          Project Management;
 
2.    Assist National MDAs and county governments in procurement of the technical services.
 
3.    Provide project management services during construction of public works and buildings.
Refurbishment and maintenance of public buildings and other public works
1.    Offer technical service.
1.    Offer technical services.
 Procurement of construction services.
2.    Manage refurbishment process.
2.    Certify safety of county buildings in accordance with national standards. 
3.    Engage in procurement of the technical and construction services.
 
4.    Certify safety of National buildings for maintenance services.
3.     
5.    Develop and build capacity in maintenance standards.
6.    Develop the legal framework for maintenance personnel.
Development and enforcement of building standards for public works and the building industry
1.    Ensure adherence to set standards and code.
1.    Spearhead development of National public works code/building code in liaison with other industry players.
2.    Report incidences of public works undertaken without conformity to standards through NCA.
2.    Operationalize review of existing standards.
 
3.    Set standards for registration and management of contractors through National Construction Authority (NCA).
 
Provision of electrical and mechanical public works services
1.    Offer electrical and mechanical public works services in the counties in liaison with the National Government.
1.    Development and maintenance of standards in the fields of Electrical and Mechanical public works construction.
2.    Build capacity in electrical and mechanical services through employment of staff in liaison with National Government.
2.    Offer consultancy services to National and County MDAs in areas of electrical and mechanical public works services.
 
3.    Develop capacity in the fields of electrical and mechanical public works.
 
4.    Assist in procurement of electrical and mechanical elements for public buildings/works.
5.    Develop standards for employment of electrical/mechanical management/maintenance personnel countrywide.
6.    Prepare and revise schemes of service for electrical/mechanical officers in consultation with the county governments.
Occupation Health and Safety standards for public works
1. Manage all records of buildings for disaster management.
1.    Develop and manage policy for occupation health and safety.
2.  Maintain a disaster management unit in each county.
2.    Enforce procedure for safe infrastructure development and application of Environmental Impact Assessment.
3.Maintain a fire fighting unit in each county.
3.    Build capacity on disaster management (planners, designers, fire fighters, engineers, health workers and other stakeholders).
4. Enforce health and occupation standards on construction of county public works and buildings.
4.    Conduct Monitoring and Evaluation of all public works as a means of response and use lessons learnt from past disaster audits to take advance preventive measure.
 
Research and development in the public construction industry
1.    Disseminate research findings.
1.    Conduct research in matters of accessibility, availability, affordability and appropriateness of materials, technologies, processes and methods of construction(innovation).
2.    Liaise with National government in research on locally available materials.
2.    Develop capacity for research through Kenya Building Research Centre (KBRC).
3.     
3.    Establish a National research secretariat to coordinate research and dissemination of findings.
4.    Initiate research through staff, commissioned agents or in collaboration with accredited research institutions.
5.    Publish reports containing research activities from time to time. 
Regulation of Architects and Quantity Surveyors
NONE
Board of Registration of Architects and Quantity Surveyors (BORAQS) maintains and updates register for Architects and Quantity Surveyors.
Supplies Branch
 Co-ordinate procurement of common user items for county departments  
Coordinate procurement of common user items for Government Ministries by procuring term contracts on behalf of the Ministries.
State functions
Co-ordination of provision of infrastructure for state functions in counties.
Co-ordination of provision of infrastructure for national state functions. 
Dated the 2nd March, 2016.
KINUTHIA WAMWANGI,
Chairman.
 

