
				Page: 907GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3510
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED LANGATA HOUSING SCHEME PHASE IV & V ON PLOTS NOS. NAIROBI BLOCK 106/251 &106/255
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed proposed housing scheme.
The project involves completion of Langata Housing Scheme. The proponent has already developed Phase I, II and III and intends to developed phase IV & V which will comprise of 230 three bedroomed housing units complete with associated external works as presented below.
Type A – 3 Bedroomed units (109SM) – 70 units
Type C – 3 Bedroomed units (112SM) – 40 units
Type D – 3 Bedroomed units (122SM) – 120 units
The project is located on Plots Nos. Nairobi Block 106/251 &106/255, about 5Km from Nairobi CBD and neighbours Kibera Slums, Ngeno and Southern land Estates.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Clearance of vegetation and soil erosion


Minimize disturbance to flora and fauna in the neighboring areas
Apply soil erosion control measures
Establish grass lawns, flower gardens and trees around and within the site


Water and energy use


Provide adequate water storage facilities & reuse water where possible.
Residents should use energy conserving lighting bulbs.
Raise awareness on water and energy conservations


Solid waste management


Contract a licenced waste collection and disposal company or NCC
Proper containment & disposal of solid waste in all project
phases
Segregate, separate and re-use construction wastes.


Effluent discharge


Project to be connected to NWSC sewer line.
Maintain internal sewer network during operation


Air and noise pollution


Ensure that noisy machineries are insulated/temporary fenced.


 


Noise hazard signs should be put displayed where necessary.


 


Machinery should be well lubricated and serviced


 


Avoid excavation works in dry weather and sprinkle water to reduce dust.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


 


Restrict construction activities to day time only.


Occupational health and safety


Provide and enforce use of proper PPEs.
Ensure that all workers have insurance covers.
All lifting equipments should be inspected and well maintained.
Shield construction activities to minimize accidents.
Provide first aid facilities and have some workers trained in first aid.
Use stable and safe ladders and scaffolds & display safety signs on site.
Engage skilled labourers and appoint a safety supervisor.


Fire hazards and Accidents


Install proper fire fighting equipments during and after construction.
Avoid storage of flammable materials near possible fire source
Sensitize workers on fire safety.


Security


Contract a reputable security firm to guard the site and the premise.
Collaborate with authority and have community policing on security issues

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Nairobi Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Westlands and Langata District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1680050          National Environment Management Authority.
 

