
				Page: 852GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3272
JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION
VACANCIES FOR THE OFFICE OF JUDGE OF THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA
THE Judicial Service Commission of Kenya invites applications from qualified persons for the following positions in the judiciary:
JUDGE OF THE HIGH COURT (26 POSTS)
Ref:.—V/No 4/2011
Terms of service.—Constitutional office.
Period of service.—Retirement at the age of 70 years with an election to retire on attaining the age of 65 years.
Functions.—A Judge of the High Court shall serve in any High Court station in Kenya and shall exercise the following function:
(a) Have unlimited original jurisdiction in criminal and  civil matters.
(b) Have jurisdiction to determine the question whether a right or fundamental freedom in the Bill of Rights has been denied, violated, infringed or threatened.
(c)   Have jurisdiction to hear an appeal from a decision of a tribunal appointed under Article 144 of the Constitution.
(d) Have jurisdiction to hear any question respecting the interpretation of the Constitution including the determination of—
(i)       The question whether any law is inconsistent with or in contravention of the Constitution;
(ii)     The question whether anything said to be done under the authority of the Constitution or of any law is inconsistent with, or in contravention of, the Constitution.
(iii)    Any matter relating to constitutional powers of State organs in respect of county governments and any matter relating to the constitutional relationship between the levels of government; and
(iv)    A question relating to conflict of laws under Article 191 of the Constitution; and
(e)  Any other jurisdiction, original or appellate, conferred by any legislation.
Constitutional and statutory Requirements for Appointment:
For appointment to the position of judge of the High Court, the applicants must possess the following qualifications:
(a) At least ten (10) years’ experience as a superior Court Judge or professionally qualified Magistrate; or 
(b) At least ten (10) years’ experience as a distinguished academic or legal practitioner or such  experience in other relevant legal field; or
(c)  Held the qualification specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) for a period of amounting, in aggregate, to ten (10) years.   (Experience gained in Kenya or in  another Commonwealth common law jurisdiction will be considered)
(d) Have a high moral character, integrity and impartiality. (In addition to the above qualifications, the applicants must demonstrate a high degree of professional competence, communication skills, fairness, good temperament, making of good judgment in both legal and life experiences and commitment to public and community service.)
The appointments shall be made in accordance with Article 166 (1) (b) of the Constitution of Kenya.
Interested and qualified persons are requested to make their applications by forwarding the following:
A letter of application.
A detailed and updated curriculum vitae summarizing the applicant’s bio-data including, background information, (such as community service, financial discipline, pro bono activity, involvement as a party in litigation and  involvement in political activity including any financial contribution to any political party/parties and criminal  record) legal practice/engagement for the last five (5) years, three (3) professional referees and two (2) character references who can verify and comment on the applicant’s past and present employment.
Completed Application for Employments Forms in triplicate- JSC 2A (for public officers) or JSC 2 (for other applicants)
Five (5) samples of any writings by the applicant, including but not limited to judgments, scholarly writings or any legal publications that the applicant has authored.
The applicant’s three recent coloured passport size photographs .
Declaration of income and liabilities as at the time of making the application, using the prescribed form (The Declaration of Income, Assets and Liabilities Form JSC 2b). For those who are in Government employment, attach copies of returns of declaration of income and liabilities and for those in private practice attach income tax returns, for the last three (3) years.
Certified copies of testimonials and professional certificates and academic transcripts.
To:   The Secretary,
Judicial Service Commission,
P.O. Box 30041–00100
NAIROBI
Email: reghck@judiciary.go.ke
So as to reach the Commission within a period of twenty-one (21) days from the date of this advertisement.
The JSC  2A and   JSC 2 Forms and the Declaration of Income and Assets Forms are available free of charge at the Commission’s  Secretary/Registrar’s Chambers, Room No. 10 at the High Court Building, Nairobi during office hours. The Forms can also be downloaded from the Judiciary’s Website-  www.judiciary.go.ke
Only shortlisted and successful candidates will be contacted.
Canvassing in any form will lead to automatic disqualification.
The Judicial Service Commission is an Equal Opportunity Employer and selects candidates on merit, through fair and open competition, from the widest range of eligible candidates.
Dated the 30th March, 2011.
L. A. ACHODE,
Secretary,
Judicial Service Commission.

