
				Page: 1962GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5150
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED OIL EXPLORATORY DRILLING AROUND THE BORDER OF LAGHBOGOL AND KORICH LOCATIONS  IN BLOCK 2B IN WAJIR COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Lion Petroleum Corporation)is proposing drill oil and gas around the border of Laghbogol and Korich locations in Block 2B Wajir County.
 The proposed project will include: storage fabricated containers and tents, air conditioned containers to be used as administration block and offices, air conditioned tents to use for the staff accommodation, specially fabricated air conditioned containers to be used as toilet, washing room and  laundry, tented workshops for use as garage, cable and mechanic repairs, fuel storage facilities will be erected at the camp as guided by the petroleum act, a borehole will be drilled to supply water to the Campsite, leveled parking for the motor vehicles, equipment and machinery, a drilling rig will be constructed within the camp site boundaries and an oil exploration well will be drilled within the campsite boundaries.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Vegetation loss and Soil erosion


The developer will undertake grass planting as the construction progresses to avoid the solid being washed or carried by wind.
Places of least vegetation cover will be identified for the campsite and only construction points will be completely cleared to ensure minimum vegetative disturbance.
Proper roof catches and gutters will be put in place to control the possible increased runoff.
Temporary storage tanks will be supplied to trap this water for irrigating planted vegetation.
Wherever possible vegetation within the should be preserved and where plants must be uprooted they should be recycled into use as construction materials, firewood or converted into soil manure


Air pollution


Pour water on vehicle paths to reduce dust
When possible vehicles should when most people and livestock are indoors


Waste Management


The Campsite will be equipped with toilet and washing facilities fully connected to licensed septic tanks as witnessed in the previous camp in the same block.
Appropriate sized portable toilets will be availed to the field staff during their working hours and to keep with the movement of operations.
The proponent will ensure that it enlists a licensed private company specialized in the handling oil and solid waste. Biodegradable kitchen waste will be composted on site for tree planting manure.
A Good housekeeping as part of the company policy will be implemented at the facility.



Ground Water Contamination


The drilling project area does not have permanent Surface River with flowing water or stream.
The seasonal streams on site are dry beds only holding water occasionally during the wet rainy season.
The drilling operations may have to stop temporarily during the very wet season when working in the area becomes difficult.
The project will have an adequate drainage on site containment to minimize uncontrolled storm water.
Well documented procedures for maintenance of the drainage system will be implemented and staff will be trained accordingly.
Oil waste will never be allowed into the environment; proper containment and accidental spill absorption regime will be implemented at all times.


Traffic congestion and accidents


The earth road network is not a busy one. Logistical procedures will ensure ease of movement.
Materials will be packed properly in specialized carriers to reduce chances of falls on the road.
Assistance will be sought from Traffic Department where necessary


Occupational Health  and safety


Dust containment and suction systems will be installed on the campsite.
Use of PPEs will be strictly enforced. Welders will be provided with respirators, eye protections and dustcoats to minimize inhalations.
Regular medical checks will be done and records maintained of the employees.
Staff working at the plant will have medical cover. Sanitation related education and practice would form part of the facility’s regular routine, to avoid incidences of infections such as cholera, bilharzias and malaria.
Swapping of work stations for staff will reduce level exposure.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Wajir County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5019843              National Environment Management Authority.

