
				Page: 1956GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5145
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED INSTALLATION OF A 2TONNE LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS STORAGE TANK AND FILLING POINT ON L.R. NO. 209/7139, OFF LIKONI ROAD IN INDUSTRIAL AREA, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Total Kenya Limited) is proposing to a 2tonne Liquefied Petroleum Gas Storage Tank and Filling Point on L.R. No. 209/7139, off Likoni Road in Industrial Area, NairobiCounty.
The proposed project includes; installation of a 2tonne LPG tank with a diameter of 1.5m and a length of 3.03 m, construction of a cylinder filling station, pipe works, paint works ,water sprinkler system and construction of a perimeter fence and gate.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Proposed Mitigation Measure


Air Quality
 


Relevant legislative and Kenya Standard design requirements will be adhered to where appropriate.
Vehicles and machinery will be regularly maintained.
Maintenance activities requiring purging of gas will be minimized and conducted under favorable meteorological conditions (to facilitate rapid atmospheric dispersion).
Install standard leak detectors for hazardous area installations.
Any detected leaks will be repaired as a high priority.
Best practice measures are implemented to minimize the potential for dust to be generated and escape off-site.


Noise Quality
 


Construction activities near sensitive places shall be restricted to normal working hours (typically 7.00 am to 6:30 pm, 7 days a week) unless otherwise agreed with the potentially affected stakeholder(s).
Relevant legislative and Kenya Standard design requirements will be adhered to where appropriate.
Adequate community notice of any scheduled, atypical noise events will be provided.
Equipment will be fitted with noise control devices where possible and appropriate


Waste  Management
 


Develop strategies (waste management plan) for management of specific waste streams prior to construction phase.
Stockpile and salvage reusable and recyclable wastes, such as timber skids, fibre/nylon rope spacers, pallets, drums and scrap metals.
Store hazardous wastes in bunded areas away from watercourses.
Collect and remove (via NEMA approved waste handler) waste from site for recycling, reuse or disposal at facility licensed to accept such wastes.
All personnel will be instructed in project waste management practices as a component of the environmental induction process
Where practical, wastes (e.g., scrap metal) will be segregated and reused/recycled.
All litter and general waste disposal will be at a local municipal landfill utilizing an approved waste contractor.
Records of all controlled wastes stored, and removed from site will be maintained.
Safety and response training will be provided for all personnel.



Soil Quality
 


Minimizing the areas to be excavated
Re-vegetating disturbed areas once construction and demolition works are completed; during construction and decommissioning phases respectively;
Ensuring that vehicles/equipment used during construction and decommissioning phases are serviced regularly.


Water Quality
 


Develop strategies for management of water resources.
Regular checking and maintenance of all plant and machinery to minimize the risk of fuel or lubricant leakages
Storing hydrocarbons, fuels, lubricants and chemicals to be used in bunded and lockable oil storage tanks, with hoses and gauges kept within the bund.
Leaving vegetation in situ wherever possible, and re-vegetation of bare soil before the next rainy season.
Exposed ground and stockpiles will be minimized to reduce silty runoff, and if necessary measures such as geotextiles will be used to shield spoil mounds.
Preventing wet concrete and cement from entering watercourse
Stockpiles to be kept away from watercourses


Occupational health and safety
 


Development and implementation of occupational health and safety plan. The Plan will cover on the following:
Formulation of EHS Management system
Development of health and safety programme
Risk assessment and health monitoring for workers
Contractor selection criteria in relation to health and safety
Job description to include health and safety requirements

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5019594              National Environment Management Authority.

