
				Page: 1961GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5149
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF ENGEN MUGUGA SERVICE STATION AT MUGUGA ALONG THE NAIROBI – NAKURU HIGHWAY ON PLOT NUMBER MUGUGA/MUGUGA/3179, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Engen (K) Limited) is proposing to develop a Service Station at Muguga along Nairobi – Nakuru Highway on Plot Number Muguga/Muguga/3179 Kiambu County.
 The development will comprise: underground storage tanks, product pipe work, dispensing pumps, station canopy, office block, tyre centre, service bay, firefighting system, electrical works and other station operations support facilities including generators and compressors.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Changes in hydrology/ impended drainage


Proper Installation of drainage structures.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures through proper design and maintenance.
Provide gratings to the drainage channels.
Regular checks on any sludge along drainage channels.
Visual checks of oil interceptor and drainage channels for any leakage.


Soil erosion


Control any earthworks.
Rehabilitate degraded environment to avoid siltation and wash offs.
Compact loose soils.
Landscaping.
Ensure management of excavation activities.
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures where necessary.
Proper disposal of excavated soil.


Air pollution


Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Spray water during the construction phase on the excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Engage sensitive construction workers.
Proper use of PPE.


Noise pollution


Maintain construction equipment.
Construction activities to be restricted to daytime.
Workers in the vicinity of or involved in high-level noise to wear respective safety & protective gear i.e. earplugs & earmuffs.
Appropriate selection of machinery.


Oil pollution


Proper storage, handling and disposal of new oil and used oil and related wastes.
Maintain equipment to avoid leaks.
Provide oil interceptors along the drains leading from the station forecourt and offloading area.


Water resource


Management of water usage.
Recycling of water at the construction phase where possible.
Use of water conservation signs at the wash rooms and install water conserving taps.
Recycling water from car wash.


Occupational Health safety


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure effective wastewater management.
Proper design of sewerage system.
Provide First Aid kits on the site.
Sensitize residents/workers on environmental management.
Ensure there is no ponding to eliminate breading of mosquitoes during construction.
Workers should be trained on occupational health & safety and first Aid administration.
Train staff on Petroleum products handling.
Sensitize workers on HIV and AIDS.


Fire outbreak


Install fire-fighting equipment as provided by OSH Act.
Sensitize the residents on fire risks i.e. conduct regular fire drills.
Adapt effective emergency response plans.
Provide emergency contact numbers and contacts of mutual aid at strategic points.


Security


Provide security guards and facilities during construction and operation phase
Security guards should always be available to alleviate cases of arson, robbery or trespass.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5678786              National Environment Management Authority.

