
				Page: 1958GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5147
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF TALEK GREEN CENTRE (BIOTISHO CENTRE), NAROK COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Base Camp Foundation Kenya) proposes to put up The Talek Green Centre (Biotishu Centre), a community centre, which means ‘good place’ for the Maasai, where they can come and achieve a higher level of wellness and wellbeing. The proposed site is located 800m from Base camp Maasai Mara (BCMM) and approximately 200m from Talek Health Centre. It is lying on a privately owned land title number CIS MARA/TALEK/ 128. Neighbouring facilities include Talek Mixed Primary School approximately 100m away and the Talek Town which is approx. 500m. This is on coordinates1°26’44’’ S and 35°13’21’’ E.
The Proposed Talek Green Centre shall consist of the following components: Renewable energy sales office, Community meeting space, Volunteer centre and office, Special school with up to 40 students, Computer training centre, Project exhibition and office space,Mini-grid PV space and a Waste management area
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Anticipated Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Soil Excavation


The Contractor understands the preferred construction process by ensuring that the existing features that are supposed to be incorporated in the construction are not excavated or removed.
The site preparation process is done with utmost care to ensure that excavation is done systematically & carefully without raising dust and creating unpleasant heaps of soils.
The Contractor undertakes to rehabilitate any degraded environment especially the reconstructed/redeveloped part of the area.
The degraded environment especially excavated areas prone to soil erosion will be rehabilitated in-situ (as the construction progresses) to avoid soil being washed down gradient into the nearest water body.
Any loose soils are compacted to avoid any wash offs.
All disturbed areas are well landscaped to improve on visual intrusion.


Potential risk of accidents and occupational risks


The implementation of safety measures and emergency plans to contain accident risks associated with vehicle transport, operation of any sophisticated machinery and other related activities.
Emergency response plans/procedures including details(phone numbers and location) of the Talek Health Centre, hospitals and the proponents site representative will be provided to the Site Foreman / Site Manager for action in case of any accidents during construction.
All staff is trained on the use of any unfamiliar machinery and equipment that may pose danger to the user before they are allowed to use them. Particularly important is the provision of protective clothing, helmets, nose masks etc.
Liaise with the Directorate of Occupational Health and Safety Department to provide for appropriate induction training and regular updating of worker skill on occupational health and safety matters.
Provide for appropriate signage, warnings and emergency contacts at work sites.
Provide appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) to workers and any visitors.
Provide for First Aid facilities as per the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2007.
Implement a detailed and site specific Emergency Response Plan.
Have a contingency plan for handling accidents.


Risk of workers falling sick during construction and operation phases
 


Attention will be paid to the sanitation at the site by providing clean water and proper housekeeping. Effective wastewater management.
Provision & use of mosquito repellent nets.
Conducting HIV Aids awareness campaigns among employees regularly
Over the counter medicine for use in case of sickness to staff and volunteers
Emergency response plans/procedures including details (phone numbers and location) of the nearest dispensaries, hospitals to be provided to the Green Centre manager.


Solid and liquid waste generation


Non-usable solid waste materials generated during the construction shall be transported for appropriate disposal either in Narok or use of composite.


Noise Generation and AirPollution


Construction Supervisors shall be encouraged to sensitise construction workers to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used
Sensitise vehicle drivers to avoid hooting or raving of engines.
Ensure construction machinery is kept in good working condition. Spraying of water during construction to reduce dust emission.
Solar power will be harnessed for use in the facility to reduce fossil fuel emission. Energy source from the generator will only be limited to backup when the principle energy source fails.
Most of the cooking shall be done using LPG.
Ensure that the emergency generator is muffled to minimize noise pollution.
Quiet Energy sources like solar power will be preferred over the use of generators that cause air pollution & produce excess noise which is not favorable for the park environment.
Drivers entering the facility area shall be expected to control the speed of their vehicles (approx. 30km/hr) to reduce dust emission and other risks including the risk of knocking wild.
animals. They will also be encouraged not to drive off the road.
Drivers will need to be instructed to desist from hooting unnecessarily.
The Proponent shall be required to put up sign posts within The Green Centre area instructing drivers speed control and unnecessary noise generation from vehicles.


Security and fire


Install and maintain firefighting equipment and machinery.
Sensitise the workers on fire risks & use fireproof materials.
Provide emergency numbers at strategic points.
Potable firefighting equipment are located at strategic points.
Provision of security from wildlife during the construction & operation phases.
Ensure that all workers have access to communication facilities for quick emergency response.
Overall security within the Mara area shall be provided by Narok County Government.


Presence of Talek Green Centre near the game reserve


The Proponent shall be expected to provide dim lighting to avoid creating unnecessary attraction to game animals during the night.
Turning off all unnecessary lights at night to avoid unnecessary attraction to wild animals during the night.


Vehicle & Human Presence


All drivers comply with traffic regulation such as speed limits (30km/hr or less) during construction and operation.
Workers and residents are well informed about the danger of straying beyond The Green Centre area as there is risk of encountering wild animals.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Narok County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/5019794              National Environment Management Authority.

