
				Page: 1965GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5392
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED SOLAR PHOTO-VOLTAIC (PV) POWER PLANT DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN KESSES DIVISION, UASIN GISHU COUNTY
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Alten Kenya Solar Farms)proposes testablish a Solar Photo-Voltaic (PV) Power Plant with a capacity to generate 40MW of electricity in Kesses Division, Uasin Gishu County
The proposed PV power facility will consist of the following key components: Solar Panels/modules (arranged in arrays);Modules support structures;AC current inverters and transformers;cabling; new grid connection substations; auxiliary services and equipment, access roads and internal road network,and infrastructures such as Control Building, warehouse, connection center
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures 


Impacts on flora, fauna, avifauna, habitat loss-destruction, disturbance and displacements


Clearing vegetation only in construction areas and demarcating areas where no clearing will happen.
Rehabilitation or ecological restoration during and after the construction phase will be undertaken with locally indigenous plants.
Maintaining of re-vegetated areas after rehabilitation has taken place.
Ensure that all human movement and activities are contained within designated construction areas in order to prevent peripheral impacts on surrounding natural habitat.
Vehicles coming into the site must use designated roads.
The wet area next to the panels will be fenced to prevent any disturbance on the fauna within the shallow water pan.
Educate all contractors as to the importance of the avifauna on the site and the importance of avoiding disturbance to it as far as possible.
Implement tree planting program within the farm to offset any loss of trees.


Noise Impact


Using mechanical equipment with noise suppressing technologies in order to reduce the noise-rating as much as possible.
Providing workers with PPEs against noise e.g. ear plugs.
Placing signs around the site to notify people about the noisy conditions
Regular maintenance of equipment to ensure they remain efficient and effective.
Construction and decommissioning works should be carried out only during the specified time which is usually as from 0800 hrs to 1700 hrs, where permissible levels of noise are high and acceptable.
There should not be unnecessary horning of the involved machinery.
Drivers to adhere to speed limits within the project site access roads and vicinity.
Construction of sound proof walls around the substation to reduce on the impacts of noise to the surrounding environment, through a plastic fence or phonic barrier if necessary.


Loss of top soil, soil compaction and soil erosion


Restricting removal of vegetation and soil cover to those areas necessary for the project development.
Sprinkling water on the soil to prevent dust from rising.
Creating specific paths for the trucks.
Ensuring there is enough space for normal percolation of water.
Landscaping.
The disturbed areas should be rehabilitated with indigenous vegetation as soon as possible to prevent soil erosion if it was necessary.
Proper installation and configuration of drainage structures to ensure their efficiency.


Impact on surface and groundwater


During construction, the design (of the drainage system) should ensure that surface flow is drained suitably into the public drains provided to control flooding within the site.
The channels should be designed with regards to the peak volumes such as periods or seasons when there is high intensity of rainfall in case such an event occurs. They should never at any time be full due to the resulting heavy downpours.
The drainage channels should ensure the safe final disposal of run-off /surface water and should be self-cleaning which means it should have a suitable gradient.
Soil stockpiles should be protected from wind or water erosion through placement, vegetation or appropriate covering if it was necessary.
Proper drainage controls such as culverts, cut-off trenches should be used to ensure proper management of surface water runoff to prevent erosion.
Cleared or disturbed areas should be rehabilitated with indigenous vegetation as soon as possible to prevent erosion and loss of bio-diversity if it was necessary.
Fuel, oil and used oil storage areas should have appropriate secondary containment (i.e. bunds) to prevent underground water contamination.
Vehicles and machines will be properly serviced and well maintained to reduce risk of potential oil and fuels spills and leakages.



Air quality (dust and vehicle emission)


Sprinkling water on soil before excavation and periodically when operations are under way to prevent raising of dusts.
Using Dust screens.
Regular maintenance and services of machines and engines.
Controlling the speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Use of clean fuels e.g. unleaded and de-sulphurized fuels if clean fuel is available.


Traffic Impact


Placing signs around the site notifying other vehicles about the heavy traffic and to set the speed limit around the site.
Ensuring all drivers for the project comply to speed regulations.
Making sure the construction doesn’t occupy the road reserves and complying to traffic and land demarcation obligations.
A grievance procedure will be established whereby any complaints by the project neighbors are recorded and responded to.


Generation of Waste


Development of a Waste Management Plan (WMP)  following the principles of waste minimization at source, segregation for re-use, recycling as well as treatment and disposal of waste.
Following EMCA regulations on Waste Management, Legal Notice 121.
Using waste minimization techniques such as buying in bulk and creating opportunities for Regulation, Reducing, Reusing, Recycling, Recovering, Rethinking, and Renovation.
Creating waste collection areas with clearly marked facilities such as colour coded bins and providing equipment for handling the wastes. The bins should be coded for plastics, rubber, organics, glass, timber, metals etc
Allocating responsibilities for waste management and identifying all sources of wastes, and ensuring wastes are handled by personnel licensed to do so especially for hazardous waste.
Making available suitable facilities for the collection, segregation, and safe disposal of the wastes.
Effluent and storm water run-off will be discharged away from watercourses (drainage channels).
Steel off-cuts will be re-used or recycled, as far as possible.
Any used oil stored on site must be stored in an impervious container.


Health and Safety Impact


Employing an OSH plan that will outline all OSH risks and provide a strategy for their management.
Ensuring all potential hazards such as movable machine parts are labeled.
Raising awareness and educating workers on risks from equipment and ensuring they receive adequate training on the use of the equipment.
Providing the workers with adequate PPEs and monitoring regularly to ensure they are replaced on time when they wear out.
Placing visible and readable signs around where there are risks.
Providing firefighting equipment and creating safe and adequate fire and emergency assembly points and making sure they are well labeled.
Providing firefighting equipment and in easily accessible areas as well as ensuring site personnel are well trained to use them as well as maintaining them regularly.
Labeling chemicals and material according to the risks they possess.
Creating safe and adequate fire and emergency assembly points and making sure they are well labeled.
Alten Kenya should ensure that the project site is properly fenced as well as employ guards to prevent children from tampering with the heavy machinery.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Uasin Gishu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5678944              National Environment Management Authority.

