
				Page: 1960GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5148
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED REHABILITATION OF THE MALINDI-MOMBASA-LIKONI-LUNGALUNGA ROAD IN MALINDI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya National Highway Authority) proposes to rehabilitate the Malindi-Mombasa-Likoni-Lungalunga Road in Malindi County. The project shall involve rehabilitating the existing bituminous Malindi-Mombasa (Nyali Bridge) and the Mombasa (Likoni)-Lunga Lunga Road, totalling 234 km.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Soil and water pollution


Minimize risks of accidental spillage and clear area immediately it occurs.
Practice Good housekeeping.
Use silt fences and hay bales to remove suspended solids from surface water runoff.
Use silt curtains to minimize sediment suspension and transport while working near water crossings.
Discharged waste water into the environment should meet recommended standards.
Avoid use of heavy machines and equipments at river riparian.
Provide solid waste / garbage collection containers and sanitation facilities.
Garbage should be segregated, biodegradable composted or sold to locals and others collected in containers and disposed off periodically.
Avoid burying non-biodegradable waste and dump at designated sites/incinerate at.


Increased Spread of HIV/AIDS


Safety, Health and Environment (SHE) induction course.
Support HIV/AIDS campaigns as required by the Strategic Plan by involving the local NGOs and government agencies already active in the project area in awareness  creation and educating the local communities on HIV /AIDS and STIs prevention.


Safety and health risks


Comply with the Occupation Health and Safety Act (2007) by provision of safety gears, equipments and clothing.
Adequate signage and availability of First Aid Kit.
Ensure hygiene and sanitation is maintained at the labour camps.
The management and use of blasting materials should be done by Contractor registered by the Mines and Geology department in strict conformity with the safety requirements for public security as stipulated in the legislations.


Air pollution


Water palliation on road section near human settlements and farms.
Proper choice of equipment with environmental management systems such as mixing plants with dust precipitators, efficient combustion engines.
Use clean fuels and energy.
Use enclosed processing and transportation equipments.
Undertake continuous maintenance of machines and equipments to reduce pollutants.


Vibrations


Provide advance notice to local communities when activities likely to cause vibration are to be undertaken.
Locate vibration sources such as of quarry sites far from settlements (recommended at least 2km as per the regulations).
Measure vibration levels.
Acquire license from the Mines and Geology department for use of explosives.


Increased Road accidents


Capacity building of traffic police officer on traffic management during construction.
Enforcement of traffic laws Installation of proper road signs and regular inspections for their presence.
Installation of speed control devices like humps.
Installation of pedestrian lanes at human settlement crossings.


Interference with local hydrology


Good design and engineering practice.
Efficient drainage system Selection of proper outfall point so as to avoid flooding at the discharge point.
Avoid pollution of water bodies.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Malindi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5019810           National Environment Management Authority.

