
				Page: 1966GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5393
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
DRAFT STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT STUDY FOR NAIROBI INTEGRATED URBAN DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 42 and 43 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, of 2003 the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received a Draft Strategic Environmental Assessment for the Nairobi Integrated Urban Development Master Plan. The SEA findings are also expected to integrate the existing sectoral plans and programs to establish sustainable urban development mechanisms.
The primary goal of Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) is to provide a high level of protection to the environment by integrating environmental considerations at the earliest stage in the plan-making process with a view to promoting sustainable development and informing the draft development plan of any significant environmental impacts
This SEA proposes the following:
(a) A collaborative approach between the planning, social, engineering and environmental departments toward enforcement of the environmental and social safeguards;
(b) Increasing of capacity in the environmental department of the NCC to help deal with the current environmental and the future issues that will arise within the City.
(c)  Establish staffing needs within the planning, social, engineering and environmental departments to deal with emerging issues as a result of the implementation of NIUPLAN;
(d) Training of staff from the planning, social, engineering and environmental departments through long term and short term courses of relevance to environmental planning, impact monitoring and performance evaluation;
(e)  Establishment of joint committees with national agencies with mandates in environmental protection and social enhancement such as the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kenya Forest Service, Kenya Wildlife Service, National Museums of Kenya, Energy Regulatory Commission and the Water Resources Management Authority. These committees can provide advisory services for policy and guideline formulation as well as in the identification of focus areas categorised into short, medium and long-term objectives;
(f)   Establishment of joint planning committees with Kajiado, Machakos, Kiambu, Murang’a and Nyandarua County for protection of trans-boundary resources. Special committees should also be formed for co-ordinated planning at urban centres located at the borders of the greater metropolitan region;
(g) Establishment of stakeholder engagement mechanisms and development of a Communication Strategy that would guide NCC officials in engaging with the general public, civil society organisations, national government agencies, development partners and any other stakeholders during the implementation, monitoring and evaluation phases of NIUPLAN;
(h) Allocation of fiscal budgets at the beginning of every financial year to facilitate the implementation of a monitoring and evaluation plan for the environmental and social impacts of NIUPLAN. This budget should be informed by annual action plans as informed by the Strategic Environmental and Social Management Plan (SESMP) for NIUPLAN. Where necessary, this budget should allow for allocation of sub-contracted services.
The key potential negative impacts and the recommended mitigation measures are highlighted below.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INSTITUTIONAL ENHANCEMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING


To improve coordination within the city departments (planning, social, engineering and environmental) and other sector agencies empowered under the law to promote sustainable development, the SEA proposes the following:
Adoption of a collaborative approach by the County Government Departments to enforce environmental and social safeguards.
Capacity building within the environmental department to deal with current and future environmental concerns of the Master Plan.
Engagement of environmental inspectors to ensure environmental compliance
Establishment of staffing needs in all departments to deal with emerging issues of NIUPLAN implementation.
Training of staff; in courses relevant to environmental planning, impact monitoring and performance evaluation
Establishment of joint committees with national agencies with mandate in environmental protection to provide advice on policy and guideline formulation
Establishment of stakeholder engagement mechanisms and communication strategy for  implementation, monitoring and evaluation phases of NIUPLAN
Allocation of a fiscal budget to facilitate the implementation of a monitoring and evaluation plan for the environmental and social impacts of NIUPLAN.


PROPOSED POLICIES GUIDELINES AND SAFEGUARDS


To ensure that environmental and social safeguards are incorporated into the decision making of the NIUPLAN,NCC should develop the following:
Environmental policy with mechanisms for environmental planning; collection of environmental data; review of environmental assessment reports, environmental monitoring, evaluation, auditing and restoration
Environmental and social safeguards for future land use plans;
Guidelines for approval of land uses in the proximity of Nairobi National Park, gazetted forests and public parks;
Guidelines for approval of any developments within the city that is in proximity of the rivers within the Nairobi River basin;
Architectural standards for the expanded CBD to promote an improved character similar to the vision of NCC;
Guidelines to promote Non-Motorised Transport within the City including provisions for road safety for non-motorised transport users and attractive landscaping;
Air quality guidelines for the City County of Nairobi;
Guidelines with criteria for identification of historical buildings and monuments and the related protection measures;
Guidelines for tree/vegetation landscaping to improve on general vegetation cover; and promote green buildings in future developments;
Employment policy that will encourage employment of local vulnerable groups in NIUPLAN implementation;
Resettlement and eviction policies in line with the Kenyan Constitution and existing laws to prevent encroachment on public land and to promote transparency and efficiency in land acquisition for public good;
Green development policies that promote minimisation of natural resource use such as rain water harvesting.


CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION STRATEGIES


Integrate mechanisms that reduce consumption of energy and raw materials, Limit GHG emissions, minimize waste and pollution; and Protect and restore ecosystems;
Include carbon footprint reduction mechanisms in the Environmental and social management frameworks for NIUPLAN Programs and Projects.
Development of policies to reduce use of petroleum products by promoting public transport in the 9 transport corridors;
Reduction of dependency on charcoal by encouraging cleaner and green cooking energy alternatives;
Tapping of Methane generated during solid waste decomposition for domestic and industrial use.
Develop policies that promote sustainable use of water. This should include mechanisms to reduce reliance on ground water and recycling of waste water.
Update building code to include onsite water treatment facilities, reuse of recycled water and rain water harvesting
Incorporate feasibility of storm water harvesting prior to discharge into natural water courses.
Promotion of urban agriculture;
Adequate design for storm water drainage systems
Provision of resources and enforcement of operational maintenance for storm water drainage systems
NCC to oversee control of parameters such as greenhouse gas emissions and emergency response services associated with climate change
Capacity building of the Environment and Natural Resources Department on Climate Change Adaptation

 

Impacts of Programs and Sectoral Master Plans 


Recommendations


Spread of informal settlements and Urban sprawl


Control sub centre developments to ensure commensurate development with immediate neighbours.
Incorporate appropriate provision of low income high density housing land uses within ease of access to the proposed sub centres.
Revise housing policy to facilitate delivery of cheaper housing for low income groups.
Enforce development controls to discourage urban sprawl.
Curb urban sprawl by incorporating appropriate low income, high density housing land uses within ease of access to the proposed sub centres.


Availability of land for development


Liaise with the National Land Commission to recover all public land in the hands of private developers (if any) for public use and prioritize available public land for development of proposed infrastructure in the NIUPLAN.
Provide a strategy for land take and compensation for acquiring private and community land.
Liaise with responsible agencies to develop guidelines on co-location of facilities.


Land use compatibility with airports and airstrips


Liaise with the Kenya Airports Authority (KAA) and Kenya Civil Aviation Authority to provide guidelines and zoning plans for compatible land uses around the airports, airstrips and flight paths.


Solid waste management


Implement the action plans in the Integrated Solid Waste Master Plan to manage existing volumes of solid waste and to manage the envisaged increase in solid waste generation.


Pollution of rivers and degradation of riparian lands


Liaise with relevant agencies to identify and delineate riparian land in the City
Control river front development through specifically developed guidelines.


Air pollution


Incorporate strategies to enhance the benefits of compact development on air pollution by promoting non-motorised transport and use of public transport systems.


Noise pollution


Enforce the Environmental Impact Assessment (Noise and Vibration (Control)) 2009 Regulations.


Uncontrolled Jua Kali Sheds and garages


Integrate planning for market spaces with the allocation of spaces for Jua Kali artisans through participatory land use planning and development of urban spaces.


Disruption and pressure on public utilities


Conduct expansion program in phases to ensure commensurate integration with existing services and population growth.
Coordinate all stakeholders and public service utility providers to ensure minimal disturbance.
Liaise regularly with responsible implementing agencies to get information on existing and future programs to allow proper planning.
Coordinate between transport development authorities and utility service providers to minimise disruption of public utilities such as water, electricity etc which may have been laid down on road reserves.


Increased waste generation


Incorporate the new integrated solid waste management strategy to reduce envisaged increase in solid waste generation.
Daily collection of wastes (mainly organic wastes) at the end of each operating day.
Integration of proposed interventions to manage odours for vehicles as well as the landfill and MRFs.
Set up a mechanism of receiving community concerns and monitoring non-compliance.
Project and incorporate waste transportation traffic in planned road expansion projects due to expected increase in traffic by hauling trucks to the landfill site.


Pressure on historical buildings and monuments of cultural importance


Involve the National Museums of Kenya to find best alternatives for urban renewal.


Increased Urban Heat Island Effect


Develop incentives for landscaping; and green building designs in new developments.


Fragmentation of wildlife dispersal areas


Liaise with KWS and Kajiado County to develop a land use plan to mitigate against possible human wildlife conflict
Ensure development control in the wildlife dispersal areas in sub centres located south of CBD.


Reduction of green spaces


Clearly demarcate boundaries for sub centres development areas to avoid ambiguous clearance of vegetation
Allocate at least 10% of land for planting suitable vegetation cover in the urban green spaces in accordance with the national forestry strategy.
Encourage sub centres’ community participation in urban forest management.
Create amnesty belts along road reserves and other public rights of way where feasible to boost vegetation cover.


Increased point source pollution


Develop suitable guidelines for establishment of light industries within the sub centres.
Define the mixed commercial uses envisaged for the various sub centres and where necessary conduct studies to determine their compatibilities with the existing land uses.
Undertake Comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment studies for the selected landfill and Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs) and implement mitigation measures.


Increased exposure to tectonic hazards


Conduct detailed seismic survey for all sub centres to guide on densification and vertical developments of both residential and commercial buildings.


Social delinquency, HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases


Develop local employment policy that will encourage employment of locals to minimise social interaction with immigrants which might predispose the population to STI’s.
Undertake education and sensitization workshops of workers and the communities around sub centres on STI’s and HIV/AIDS.
Work closely with various HIV/AIDS organisations working in the project zone of influence in order to achieve the best results.

The full Strategic Environmental Assessment for the Nairobi Integrated Urban Development Master Plan is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521-00100, Nairobi.
 (b)     Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi City County.
A copy of the Draft SEA report can be downloaded from www.nema.go.ke (SEA/024).
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process regarding the SEA comments can be emailed to dgnema@nema.go.keo.
KODIA D. BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/5678989           National Environment Management Authority.

