
				Page: 1912GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5276
BUNGOMA COUNTY GOVERNMENT
TASK FORCE ON DEVELOPING COMMUNITY BASED CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR CHETAMBE AND MT. ELGON ECOSYSTEM IN BUNGOMA COUNTY
APPOINTMENT
PURSUANT to Article 69 of the Constitution of Kenya, the obligations in respect to the Environment include sustainable environmental management, tree cover, intellectual property and indigenous knowledge, and public participation. More importantly, under the Fourth schedule, the County Government is responsible for implementation of specific National Government policies on natural resources and environmental conservation and management, including soil and water conservation; and forestry. The task force will be charged with the responsibility of developing a community based Mt. Elgon ecosystem conservation and management plan which will provide short and long term strategies, recommendations and measurable actions to promote community sustainable development and Eco-tourism in Bungoma County.
Schedule
Oluchiri Omuterema (Dr.)—(Chairperson)
Reuben Kiboi Cheprot—(Vice-Chairperson)
Memberss:
Donald Siamba (Prof.)
Fredrick Foorost
Phillip Wasike
Agnes Wepukhulu (Mrs.)
Amos Tumwet
Leornard Wekesa Mindila
Carol Nelima Wafula
Timothy Chesoli
Jack Mukhongo
Erick Lumukile Murumba Wambasi
Mwanamisi Asambo Kombo
Evalyne Wanyama—(Secretary)
Task force Terms of Reference:
The task force on community based conservation and management plan for Chetambe and Mt. Elgon ecosystem will be charged with the responsibility of:
(a) Undertaking Resource Use Assessment detailing resource use by the people/groups across the mountain.
(b) Undertaking Resource inventory to describe various aspects of Chetambe and Mt. Elgon Ecosystem and contribution towards Ecotourism.
(c)  Reviewing community ecosystem conservation approaches/practices and indigenous knowledge.
(d) Analyses the role Community Forest Associations in forest management.
(e)  Assessing availability and capacity of community based groups in ecosystem conservation and management.
(f)   Provide information on degraded areas and identify priority areas for conservation.
(g) Determine the major challenges and interventions in the conservation of the Chetambe and Mt. Elgon ecosystem.
(h) Develop conservation and management plans for Chetambe and Mt. Elgon Ecosystems.
Dated the 9th July, 2014.
KENNETH M. LUSAKA,
MR/5678764                                    Governor, Bungoma County.

