
				Page: 2351

GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6109
THE KENYA INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS ACT
(No. 2 of 1998)
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY SECTOR POLICY GUIDELINES
AMENDMENT
PURSUANT to Gazette Notice No. 2431 of 2006, the Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communications and Technology amends the policy guideline issued vide that Gazette Notice by inserting the following new paragraph immediately after paragraph 5.18 
5.19 Implementation of Regional Roaming Tariffs within the one network area.
5.19.1 (1) In this paragraph 
“one network area” means the regional framework comprising of countries that have agreed to waive or manage roaming charges and other surcharges for telecommunications traffic within the one network area;
“regional framework” means telecommunications traffic originating and terminating within one network area.
(2) The regional framework, shall not 
(a) apply surcharges to international incoming traffic;
(b) impose additional charges to subscribers roaming within the one network area;
(c)  impose charges to subscribers for receiving calls while roaming within the one network area.
(3) The Communications Authority of Kenya shall, from time to time, prescribe the maximum retail and wholesale or the inter-operator tariff rates for calling within the one network area which rates shall initially be at the rate of USD 0.10 per minute for retail and USD 0.07 per minute for wholesale.
(4) A subscriber using telecommunications services while travelling within the one network area shall be charged as a domestic subscriber in the country network they have visited, and in particular shall incur prevailing domestic rates of the visited network similar to what domestic subscribers pay.
5.19.2 A mobile communications network operator within the one network area shall re-negotiate its bilateral agreements in order to ensure the implementation of the one network area.
5.19.3 The effective date of the provisions of this paragraph shall be the 1st September 2014.
Dated the 20th August, 2014.
FRED MATIANG’I,
Cabinet Secretary,
Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology.
 



