
				Page: 251Gazette Notice No. 2199
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MENENGAI – RONGAI 400kV TRANSMISSION LINE IN NAKURU COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Electricity Transmission Company Limited) is proposing to construct, own and operatea 400kV electricity transmission line from Menengai to Rongai Nakuru County.
The proposed transmission line will traverse Rongai sub-county from Menengai crater through Ol-Rongai, Makutano, Kampi ya Moto, Lengenet to Salgaa in Rongai location.
The scope covered various activities related to; construction works of the proposed development which included ground preparation, construction of the 400/33kV substations and 400Kv electrical transmission line; operation; and decommissioning.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
 

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Terrestrial habitat alteration


Re-vegetation of disturbed areas with native plant species.
Undertake selective clearance by removing tall woody species leaving saplings, for quick regeneration of vegetation along the way-leave.


Noise and vibration
 


Sensitise the workforce and truck drivers on issues of equipment maintenance. Supervise construction traffic, maintain plant and equipment, undertake construction only during the daytime for peace of the neighbours, workers to wear ear plugs, muffs as part of the personal protective gear.


Risk of leaks or spills
 


Regular maintenance of site equipment.
Investigate the possibility of catalytic converters.
Safety procedures for fuel storage and refuelling.
Dispose of oil residues carefully.


Road safety
 


Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles during construction, design a separate vehicle entry different from the common entrance with the residents, streamline traffic flow into and out of the premises, initiate changes in traffic flow in the micro-area upon commissioning, install approximate cautionary signage for motorists entering the premises.
Ensure appropriate road safety signage.
Ensure all drivers adhere to the traffic laws and requirements.
Erection of bumps where human and vehicular traffic have high interaction opportunities.


Soil erosion
 


Soils excavated for the erection of towers should be used for re-filling and should not be left exposed to wind or water for long periods.
The contractor should avoid steep terrain during the transportation of construction material by using alternative routes or use light vehicles where appropriate.
Riverine vegetation should be minimally disturbed during the construction phase to reduce soil erosion and safeguard riverbank protection.
Re-plant degraded areas with local species common in the area to complement natural vegetation regeneration to improve ground cove.


Air Pollution (dust, fuel emissions)


Control speed of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase on excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of plant and equipment.
Provision of dust masks for use when working in dusty conditions.


Contamination of ground and surface water
 


Maintenance of construction vehicles should be carried out in the Contractor’s camp and a recognized garage.
Proper storage, handling and disposal of oil wastes from machinery, discourage servicing of machinery and vehicles.


Management of solid waste


Contractor must dispose solid wastes away from the site to an approved disposal site.
Temporary pit latrine for construction workers.
Solid waste holding bins (segregated into different compartments), engage approved refuse handling agents for the various waste types emanating from the building, carry out an annual waste audit to determine quantities and characterization of wastes and hence mode of disposal, identify hazardous wastes for specialized disposal.


Risk of fire
 


Establishing a network of fuel breaks of less flammable materials or cleared land to slow progress of fires and allow firefighting access.
Provision of fire safety system that includes training, firefighting equipment; regular maintenance of machinery, vehicles and equipment; and no burning activities to be allowed close to or within the site.
Controlled burning of vegetation in transmission line rights-of-way should adhere to applicable burning regulations, fire suppression equipment requirements, and typically must be monitored.


Electrocution from live power lines


A maintenance system to ensure physical integrity of structures is maintained.
Deactivating and properly grounding live power distribution lines before work is performed on, or in close proximity, to the lines.
Ensuring that live-wire work is conducted by trained staff.
Workers should not approach an exposed energized or conductive part even if properly trained unless the worker is : - properly insulated from the energized part with gloves or other approved, insulation; the energized part is properly insulated from the worker and any other conductive object; the worker is properly isolated and insulated from any other conductive object (live-line work).

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
(d) County Director of Environment, Nakuru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6992961           National Environment Management Authority.

