
				Page: 752Gazette Notice No. 2200
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED 400 SILALI – RONGAI 150 KM 400KV DOUBLE CIRCUIT TRANSMISSION LINE TRAVERSING NAUDO, LORUK, MARIGAT, AND EMINING IN BARINGO COUNTY AND TERMINATES AT SALGAA, RONGAI IN NAKURU COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Electricity Transmission Company –KETRACO) is proposing to install a 150km, 400 kV transmission line to link Silali and Rongai. It traverses through Naudo, Loruk, Marigat, Emining in Baringo County and terminates at Salgaa, Rongai, Nakuru County and has a way leave of 60m.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Displacement of persons, loss of land and land use rights


Continuous community sensitization and awareness creation regarding the project.
Detailed Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) study along the 150km line route.
RAP Implementation - Fair compensation of PAPs  Structures and Land.
Re-route and Re-alignment costs.


Fire risk


Ensure firefighting equipment is provided at active site.
Flammable material should be stored and transported in appropriate containers.
Train workers on fire risk management
No burning of any materials should be permitted at the site.


Loss of flora and fauna
 


Limit clearance of vegetation to the way leave row area (60 metres).
Selectively clear vegetation. Remove only tall woody species and leave saplings for quick regeneration of vegetation along the way leave.
Re-afforestation outside the wayleave area ensuring that invasive tree species such as the prosopis juliflora are planted away from the wayleave.


Soil erosion
 


Soils excavated from tower foundations used for backfilling.
Excavated soils should not be left exposed to wind or water for long periods.
Excess soil should be well evened out on site.
The contractor should avoid steep terrain during the transportation of construction material by using alternative/existing routes.
Re-plant degraded areas with local species common in the area to enhance natural vegetation regeneration and improve ground cover.


Water pollution
 


Storage and transportation of oil, fuel and other hazardous material to be done in appropriate containers.
Training of site workers on handling of spillages.
Availing spillage kits including suitable PPE in storage areas.
Proper management of waste containers, litter and other waste generated during construction in compliance with waste management regulations 2006.
Adherence to EMCA Regulations on water quality.
Routine inspection.
Maintenance records.


Visual and aesthetic impact
 


Extensive public consultation during the planning of power line and power line right-of-way locations.
After construction, natural vegetation should be restored in non-operational areas of the site and/or additional landscape planting with local indigenous species used to improve views into the site.


Vehicular and human traffic impacts
 


Extensive public consultation during the planning of power line and power line right-of-way locations
After construction, natural vegetation should be restored in non-operational areas of the site and/or additional landscape planting with local indigenous species used to improve views into the site.


Liquid and solid wastes
 


Sensitization of workers on environmental protection and safety.
Provision of solid waste management facilities for the temporary storage and segregation of waste prior to disposal.
Liaison with the local County authorities on suitable dumping site for generated waste.
Excavated soil to be used for backfilling.


Noise and vibration impacts
 


Use of noise protection devices when working with noisy equipment .
The contractor will also be expected to use serviceable equipment with low noise emission and instruct truck and machine operators to avoid raving of engines.


Rock blasting impacts
 


The contractor should provide safety signage, humps, banksmen.
Watering to suppress dust.
Ensuring proper blast design and driller-blaster communication.
Carry out inspection prior to loading and firing of the blast.
Controlling access to the blast area, and using a blasting shelter.
Use of an experienced driller to detect potential problem areas such as voids, mud seams, incompetent rocks, and other irregularities by observing the progress of drilling.


Air pollution (dust and exhaust emissions)
 


Sensitization of workers on environmental protection and safety.
Control speed of construction vehicles
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase on dusty excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of plant and equipment.
Provision of dust masks for use when working in dusty conditions.
Use of serviceable vehicles and machinery to avoid excessive smoke emission.


Employment of local labour
 


Maximise use of local labour in execution of construction activities in which they are qualified for.
Involvenment of local leaders in recruitment process.


Bird mortalities
 


Undertake wire marking to alert birds to the presence of power line.
Build raptors platforms on top of pylons for roosting and nesting.


Aircraft navigation safety
 


Install visual markers as an indication for light aircraft.
Obtain KCAA approval for tower heights.


Electrocution from live power lines
 


Ensuring physical integrity of structures is maintained.
Deactivating and proper grounding of live power distribution lines before work is performed on, or in close proximity to the lines.
Ensuring that live wire work is conducted by trained workers only.
Ensuring the workers are properly isolated and insulated from any conductive object (live – line work).


Working at heights during maintenance
 


Testing of structures for integrity prior to undertaking work.
Implement a fall protection program that includes training in climbing techniques and use of fall protection measures.
Inspection, maintenance and replacement of fall protection equipment
Use of helmets and other protective devices.
Provision of first aid facilities at site.


Transmission line demolished materials
 
 


Buildings to be demolished where reuse not appropriate.
Re use materials where appropriate.
Remove all plant and equipment.
Remove all solid and liquid wastes.
Remove all access roads.
Re-seed sites.


