
				Page: 751Gazette Notice No. 2197
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(Cap. 286)
Completion of Part Development Plans
(PDP No. CKR/222/14/01 for Existing Sites for Kibirigwi Irrigation Farmers Co-operative Society Limited and Assistant County Commissioners office)
NOTICE is given that the above-mentioned part development plans were on 21st October, 2014, completed.
The part development plans relate to land situated within the Kirinyaga County.
Copies of the part development plans have been deposited for public inspection at the offices of the County Physical Planning Officer, Kirinyaga, County Commissioner, Kirinyaga Central and Deputy Commissioner, Kirinyaga West.
The copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons interested at offices of County Physical Planning Officer, Kirinyaga, County Commissioner, Kirinyaga Central and Deputy Commissioner, Kirinyaga West, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. Monday to Friday.
Any interested person who wishes to make any representation in connection with or objection to the above-named part development plans may send such representations or objections in writing to be received by the County Physical Planning Officer, P.O. Box 483, Kerugoya, within sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this notice and such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
Dated the 23rd March, 2015.
W. L. LOKA,
MR/7056502           for Director of Physical Planning.
Gazette Notice No. 2198
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(Cap. 286)
Completion of Development Plans
(PDP No. R163/2015/01 for Narok Local Physical Development Plan)
NOTICE is given that the above-mentioned part development plan was on 15th February, 2015 completed.
The part development plan relates to land situated within Narok Township, Narok County.
Copies of the part development plan has been deposited for public inspection at the offices of the County Physical Planning Officer, Narok, County Commissioner, Narok, Chief, Township Location and Director of Physical Planning, Ardhi House, Nairobi.
The copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons interested at offices of County Physical Planning Officer, Narok, County Commissioner, Narok, Chief, Township Location and Director of Physical Planning, Ardhi House, Nairobi, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. Monday to Friday.
Any interested person who wishes to make any representation in connection with or objection to the above-named part development plan may send such representations or objections in writing to be received by the Director of Physical Planning, P.O. Box 45025, Nairobi and the Chief Officer, Physical and Urban Development, P.O. Box 753, Narok, within sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this notice and such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
Dated the 17th March, 2015.
L. K. KIENI,
MR/7054488           for Director of Physical Planning.

