
				Page: 754Gazette Notice No. 2201
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED QUARRYING, EXCAVATION AND PROCESSING OF DIATOMITE AT KOSITEI, POKOT EAST SUB-COUNTY, BARINGO COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Chuanshan International Mining Company Ltd) is proposing to Quarry, Excavate and Process Diatomite at Kositei, Pokot East Sub-County, Baringo County.
The main aim of the  project is to prospect, quarry diatomite and associated rocks, process and package for sale on medium scale both locally and internationally. The development is intended to contribute to the supply of quality diatomite to the local market and for export.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Vegetation loss and soil erosion


Chuanshan International will undertake grass planting as the construction progresses to avoid the soils being washed or carried by wind. Places of least vegetation cover will be identified for the campsite and only construction points will be completely cleared to ensure minimum vegetative disturbance. Proper roof catches and gutters will be put in place to control the possible increased runoff.
Temporary storage tanks will be supplied to trap this water for irrigating planted vegetation.


Soil and bedrock disturbance and landscape interference


The stripped topsoil and tailings from the screening process will be used to progressively backfill the dugout trenches immediately behind the abandoned mine. This combination of mining and backfilling leaves only minimal sized mine pit opening at any given time. Care will be taken not to interfere with the course of the seasonal steams, by leaving clearance of at least 30m from the operations points. This is in keeping with the Legal Notice 120 – Water Quality Regulations 2006.


Ponding risk from construction


The Proponent will do landscaping, and fill the depressions including borrow pits and disused quarries. Sporadic torrential rains may fill up pits still in use with water. In such cases supplemental pumping into suitably designed drainage outlets into the seasonal stream will be ensured. The quality of the discharged water will be monitored in keeping with the legal Notice 120, of 2006.


Loss of plant life and associated bio communities


Although plant diversity is low at the proposed site, the proponent will incorporate greater species diversity in their rehabilitation and landscaping programmes. The services of knowledgeable curator/botanist will be employed to implement this feature. Close collaboration and assistance will be sought and built with the Kenya Forest Service at Kabarnet and the Kenya Forestry Research Institute, for supply of appropriate forbs seeds and establishing tree nurseries in the rehabilitation Programme.


Increased surface runoff and soil erosion


Since the area is arid and semi-arid the amount of continual runoff will be minimal and therefore of little impact. However, the proponent will construct surface rainwater trap-pits and cut-off drains to check occasional runoff. Roof catchment’s gutters connected to tanks will harvest excess rainwater. The water would also be used for irrigating planted vegetation, outdoor cleaning such as of vehicles and toilet cleaning, thereby reducing demand on
Water supply.


Air pollution from dust and engine exhaust gases


Prompt compaction of loose soils and aggressive grass replanting will be implemented. The distance to the nearest population concentration is about 1km. The impact of the dust to the surrounding people is therefore unlikely. Water will be sprinkled onto the disturbed off-pit soil to reduce flying dust. However, the mining operation will produce very little dust since the clays on the diatomite-bearing horizon are normally saturated with water. Employees/construction workers will be provided with personal protective equipment (PPE), to reduce possible dust and noxious gas inhalation.


Alternation of soil geochemistry


Beneficial use will be made of these chemical dynamics by investing on plant species that can utmost benefit from the availed minerals through efficient absorption. Assistance will be sought from KEFRI and other soil and botanical experts. Otherwise, backfilling will recognize the depth origin of the overburden and tailings, where the latter will go in first.


Waste into the environment


This area is not connected to the Municipal sewerage network. The staff will not be residing on site but appropriate sized potable septic tanks will be availed to staff during their working hours. Quality standards will be adhered to through initial testing and periodic monitoring in line with the requirements of NEMA contained in the Legal Notice 120, of 2006. The proponent will ensure that a licensed private company specialized in the handling oil and solid waste will be enlisted. Biodegradable kitchen waste will be composted on site for tree planting manure. A Good housekeeping as part of the company policy will be implemented at the facility.


Surface and ground water contamination


The SL has seasonal surface running streams. The project will have an adequate drainage on site containment to minimize uncontrolled storm water. Well-documented procedures for maintenance of the drainage system will be implemented and staff will be trained accordingly. Oil waste will never be allowed into the environment; proper containment and accidental spill absorption regime will be implemented at all time. Vegetative pollutant traps and continual monitoring of the waters on site and surrounding areas will form part of the pollution control efforts by the company.


Disease ransmission through social interaction


Special trainings will be conducted for employees on HIV, and related social health risks. The company, through its social responsibility, will extend community education into the surrounding areas.


Noise pollution nuisance


The contractor will ensure that the operations of most of the machinery such as excavator, loader shovel and graders are concentrated within 100m-radius and that all workers are provided with and using PPE such as  earmuffs. Although there are no residential dwellings in the SL area noise surveillance instruments will be availed periodically to check on any excesses.


Traffic congestion and accidents


The highway is not a busy one. Logistical procedures will ensure ease of movement. Materials will be packed properly in specialized carriers to reduce chances of falls on the road. Assistance will be sought from Traffic Department  where necessary.


Health deterioration of facility workers


Dust containment and suction systems will be installed. Use of PPEs will be strictly enforced. Welders will be provided with respirators, eye protections and dustcoats to minimize inhalations. Regular medical checks will be done and records maintained of the employees. Staff working at the plant will have medical cover. Sanitation related education and practice would form part of the facility’s regular routine, to avoid incidences of infections such as cholera, bilharzias and malaria. Swapping of work stations for staff will reduce level of exposure.


Noise pollution


The contractor will ensure that the required noise levels are observed during the decommissioning phase. Noise surveillance instruments will be availed periodically to check on any excesses.


Bodily injuries and accidents


The contractor will ensure supervision of work and handling of equipment is restricted to only skilled and experience personnel to prevent accidents. Debriefing on safety procedure for site workers will precede any such works. Both the contractor and proponent will observe work ethics and worker’s compensation in case of injury or loss. PPE like helmets, overall, nose and eyes protection hand gloves and boots, all of suitable quality will be used.
Use of PPE like earmuffs will be enforced.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
(d) County Director of Environment, Baringo County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7054298           National Environment Management Authority.

