
				Page: 740Gazette Notice No. 2119
THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT
(Cap. 102)
Commission of Inquiry
A COMMISSION TO INQUIRE INTO THE PETITION TO SUSPEND THE MAKUENI COUNTY GOVERNMENT
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, I, Uhuru Kenyatta, President and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Forces of the Republic of Kenya, do direct the commissioners to hold an inquiry with immediate effect.
1.  The terms of reference shall be to:
(a) inquire into the circumstances leading to the assertions in the Petition that Makueni County Government has irretrievably broken down with the County Assembly operating as a parallel Government to the County Government under the leadership of the Governor;
(b) inquire into allegations in the Petition that the County Government of Makueni is completely dysfunctional and cannot discharge its constitutional mandate;
(c) perform any other task that the Commission may deem necessary in fulfilling the foregoing terms of reference.
(d) recommend such legal or administrative measures as the Commission may deem necessary, and to report its findings and recommendations within six (6) months.
2.  In the discharge of its mandate, the Commission may—
(a) receive views from members of the public and receive written and/or oral statements from any person with relevant information and may—
(i)  use any previous reports in the matter;
(ii) receive expert opinion in any relevant areas;
(b) determine its rules of procedure and develop its own work plan;
(c) publish its rules of procedure in the Kenya Gazette;
(d)      summon any person or persons concerned to testify on oath and to produce any books, valuations or any other documents that the commission may require.
(e) determine the hours and times and places for sittings;
(f) hold the inquiry in public but may hold private hearings whenever it becomes necessary.
3.  The Commission shall have all the powers necessary or expedient to effectively discharge its mandate, including the power to require co-operation from public and state officers from Makueni County.
Dated the 6th March, 2015.
UHURU KENYATTA,
President.

