
				Page: 25Gazette Notice No. 77
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED HOUSING SCHEME ON PLOTS L.R. Nos. KJD/KAPUTIEI NORTH/41359, 41360, 41361 AMALGAMATED AS ONE PLOT AT KISAJU ALONG KITENGELA—ISINYA ROAD IN KAJIADO COUNTY
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Mwalimu National Co-Operative and Credit Society Limited) is proposing to Construct Residential Houses on Plots L.R. Nos. Kjd/Kaputiei North/41359, 41360, 41361 Amalgamated as one Plot at Kisaju along Kitengela - Isinya Road in Kajiado County
The proposed project involves constructing residential houses in a gated housing estate. The estate will comprise 3-Bedroomed Masionettes and Apartment Blocks. In total there will be 5 types of Apartment Blocks containing 200 one-bed roomed units, 350 two-bed roomed units, 250 three-bed roomed units and 71 three-Bed roomed Masionettes. The rest of the area will be used for access roads, parking, school area, commercial area, playgrounds, waste water treatment plant, water treatment and generator area as shown in the projects Master plan.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Project Phase


Construction


Environmental Impacts


Causes


Proposed Mitigation Measures


Soil disturbance


Excavations


Undertake manual excavation where necessary.
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Landscaping on project completion.


Vegetation loss


Site clearance


The clearance of the site for construction purposes should be kept to a minimum.
Instruct all construction workers to restrict clearing to the marked areas and not to work outside defined work areas.
Rehabilitate all disturbed areas by planting vegetation cover.


Disturbance of the seasonal water way


Excavations of perimeter fence


Reserve and a 10m wide riparian area to the south along the seasonal waterway.
Undertake afforestation along the seasonal waterway riparian zone.
Establish a live fence between the project’s perimeter fence and the seasonal waterway riparian zone to stabilize the banks.


Land pollution from excavated heavy clay (Black cotton soil)


Excavations


Use the excavated clay as landfill in a decommissioned quarry and plant Casuarina trees.


Pollution from solid waste


Construction debris


Regularly dispose solid wastes through licensed waste disposal agents.


Noise pollution


Construction and vibration


Limit construction to day time only (8a.m. to 5p.m.).
Comply with Noise and Excessive vibration Pollution Control) Regulation, 2008.


Oils and grease


Onsite service of vehicles


Do not service vehicles and machinery on site.
Use well serviced and maintained vehicles and machinery.


Health, safety and emergency preparedness


Project activities


Ensure low speed for material transporters during delivery of materials.
Provide personal protection equipments (PPEs) to workers and engineers.
Ensure professional wiring of electric cables.
Ensure workers wear earmuffs when noise is above the admissible levels.
Conduct regular awareness creation for health and safety to workers especially on HIV and AIDS.
Contractor to insure workers for injuries.
Backfill temporary trenches as soon as their need are no longer required.
Install warning signs or red tape at both deep and shallow trenches.


Project Phase


Operation


Pollution from waste water


Burst drainage pipes and waste water treatment plants


Register a wastewater treatment company for the housing estate.
The wastewater treatment company to obtain effluent discharge license from NEMA for the housing estate.
Install adequate waste treatment plant.
Regularly inspect and exhaust sludge from filled up waste water treatment plants.
Reuse treated water for irrigating lawns and flower beds.
Compost the sludge for use as fertilizer.


Pollution from solid waste


Household refuse from residential units


Segregate solid waste at source and containerize it in bags and place the bags in a temporary holding area.
Regularly dispose solid wastes through licensed waste disposal agents.


Oils and grease


Grey water


Install grease traps along the grey water drainage system.


Health, safety and emergency preparedness


Occupancy


Install fire extinguishers at strategic points such as stairways, parking lots and in the commercial area.
Ensure regular servicing of fire extinguishers.
Conduct regular fire training and drills.


Impeded drainage


Land cover by building and paved areas


Install recommended drainage structures.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures through proper design and maintenance.
Direct storm water to the natural drainage system along the seasonal waterway.


Flooding from storm water


Rain water


Install gutters to harvest rainwater from the roofs for some limited domestic use.
Direct excess storm water to into the natural drainage system.


Increased resource use (Water)


Occupancy


Use a roofing material that will allow harvesting of roof water for some limited domestic use.
Use recycled water for irrigation.
Sink at least two boreholes to exploit different aquifers.


Increased resource use (Electricity)


Occupancy


Encourage use of energy saving bulbs and water push taps.
Install solar panels for street lighting and water heaters.


Project Phase


Decommissioning


Land Pollution


Demolition debris


Hold waste in a secured temporary site prior to collection.
Regularly dispose solid wastes through licensed waste disposal agents.


Noise


Demolition equipment


Limit demolition to day time.
Comply with Noise And Excessive vibration Pollution Control Regulation, 2008.
Ensure workers are protected when noise is above the admissible levels.


Oils and grease


Onsite service of machinery


Do not service machinery on site.
Use properly maintained machinery.


Health, safety and emergency preparedness


Demolition activities


Provide personal protection equipments (PPEs) to workers and engineers where necessary.
Ensure low speed for material transporters.
Switch off electricity from the pole before demolition commences.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/6724013              National Environment Management Authority.

