
				Page: 19Gazette Notice No. 69
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF SAMBURU
Report on the Extent of Compliance with the National Values and Principles of Governance and of Public Service
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The Samburu County Public Service Board is a body corporate established by section 57 of the county Governments Act, no. 17, 2012 and Articles 235 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010 which gave the County Government the task of:
(a) Establishing and abolishing offices in its Public Service;
(b) Appointing persons to hold offices and confirming appointments; and
(c)  Exercising disciplinary control over and removing persons holding or acting in those offices.
The board has perpetual succession and is capable of suing and be sued under its corporate name. The board is composed of the following:
Bernard Lenaronkoito              –Chairman.
Alice lenanyokie–Vice Chairperson.
Patrick Lekimain–Member.
Samuel Lempushuna–Member
Timothy Lesingiran–Member.
David Lenemiria–Member.
Dorcas Lekisanyal–Secretary.
2.0 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SAMBURU COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
Section 59 of the County Governments Act 2012 stipulates the functions of the Board as follows:
               (i)    To establish and abolish offices in the County Public Service
             (ii)    To appoint persons to hold or act in offices of the County Public Service including in the Boards of Cities and Urban Areas within the County and to confirm appointments.
            (iii)    To exercise disciplinary control over, and remove, persons holding or acting in those offices as provided for under this part.
            (iv)    To prepare regular reports for submissions to the County Assembly on the execution of the functions of board
             (v)    To promote in the County Public Service the values and principles referred to in Article 10 and 232
            (vi)    To evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service.
          (vii)    To facilitate the development of coherent, integrated human resource planning and budgeting for personnel emoluments in counties.
         (viii)    Advise the County Government on human resource management and development.
            (ix)    To advise county government on implementation and monitoring of the national performance management systems in counties.
Make recommendations to the Salaries and Remuneration Commission on behalf of the County Government on the remuneration, pensions and gratuities for county public service employees.
This report specifically expounds on the County Government Act 2012 requirement; that the County Public Service Board reports to the County Assembly the extent to which the National values and principles of governance and public service are adhered to by the public service in Samburu County.
3.0 PROMOTION OF THE NATIONAL VALUES AND PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNANCE AND OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE BY THE SAMBURU COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
The Samburu County Public Service Board since its inception on 4th June, 2013 has been able to achieve the following in regard to the above
(a) The board ensured that all County staff filled the wealth declaration forms as stipulated by The Public Officer, Ethics Act of 2003.
(b) The Board visited North Sub-County on promotion of National Values and Principles of Governance and of Public Service.  The board explained to the employees what the national values and principles of governance are and the importance of adhering to them. Also during the induction of ECDE teachers in all the three Sub-Counties (Samburu East, North, and Central), the board educated ECDE Teachers on the requirement of always being bound by the above values when they:
                       (i)    Apply or interpret the constitution.
                     (ii)    Apply or interpret any law.
                    (iii)    Implement public policy decisions.
(c) During the recruitment of:
                       (i)    Sub-County Administrators;
                     (ii)    Accountants and Head of Departments;
                    (iii)    Drivers;
                    (iv)    Chief Officers;
                     (v)    ECDE Teachers;
                    (vi)    Town administrator;
                  (vii)    Rangers; and
                 (viii)    Absorption of defunct local authority casuals and health employees formerly under the Economic Stimulus Programme.
The board upheld the national values and principles of governance and Public Service by:
                       (i)    Advertising the available vacant positions and shortlisted candidates on the national newspapers and on notice boards locally.
                     (ii)    Observing high standards of professional ethics.
                    (iii)    Using fair competition and merit as the basis of recommendation for appointments.
                    (iv)    Recommendations for appointments represented the diverse communities in the County.
                     (v)    Women, youth, Men, and persons with Disabilities were given equal opportunities.
                    (vi)    Conducting suitability interviews for the absorbed staff.
(d) As the Board carries out its mandates, it has attempted to do the following:
                       (i)    Utilize the available resources economically, efficiently and effectively.  Despite limited office space and inadequate means of transport, the board has been successful in carrying out its mandates.
                     (ii)    The board has been prompt and impartial in responding to oral or written inquiries from both the staff and the members of the public.
                    (iii)    Any information from the board to the public has been disseminated in the shortest time possible.
4.0 UPCOMING PROGRAMS
Tabulated below; are the programs the board intends to carry out in order to promote national values and principles of governance and of the Public Service. 

Objective


Activity


Timeline


Promotion of values and principles of governance and public service Article 10 and 232


1. Print brochures to give to staff and members of public service  
2. Meetings and trainings
3. Public Baraza’s
      (i) Sub-County and Ward Administrators
    (ii) Village Administrators- when recruited
4. Other communications
      (i) Samburu County Website
    (ii) Serian Radio talk show
5. Partnership with other stakeholders
       (i)  PSC
      (ii)    KSG
    (iii)    Other CPSBs
6. Target in the performance contracting for Chief Officers
7. Benchmark with other Counties 
8.International treaties and conventions on good governance in the county public service


1. January 2015
 
2. February
3.March-April 2015
 
 
 
 
4. May 2015
 
 
5. Continuous
 
 
 
6.January 2015
 
7. continuous
8. May 2015


Investigate any Violation


The Board is currently undertaking investigation on a reported violation of the said values and principles in Samburu National Reserve (involving collusion by some staff to defraud the County)  in order to take a corrective measure


November 2014
 
 On need basis


Evaluate on compliance with Principles and Values with a view of reporting to the County Assembly


Report to the County Assembly


December 2014
Every December

5.0 IMPEDIMENTS THE SAMBURU COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD FACED IN ITS AIM TO PROMOTE NATIONAL VALUES AND PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNANCE AND PUBLIC SERVICE 
As the board promoted the values and principles; it encountered the following challenges:
(a)     Budget constraints, limited office space and inept human resource
(b)     Inadequate means of transportation and inaccessible parts of Samburu County
(c)      The defunct local Authority staffs were demoralized and during the process of reorganization staffs were resistant to change.
(d)     Minority communities living in Samburu County identify with the majority community and thus it became difficult to identify the true minorities in the application forms
(e)      Gender balance was difficult to achieve since most women and youth who apply for the advertised positions do not meet the minimum requirements
(f)       Disabled persons do not identify themselves in the applications. (There were no certificates attached from National Council for disabled)
(g)     Literacy levels are very low in the County; in fact, some professional fields such as engineering and legal services do not get any applicants when advertised by the board.
(h)     Insecurity in Samburu County is also another impediment. Applicants especially from other counties consider Samburu County as insecure and therefore, either request higher allowances or fail to report for the positions recruited for.
(i)       Interruption of the board duties due to court injunction during the recruitment of the county chief officers.
6.0 RECOMMENDATIONS
For the national values and principles of governance and of Public Service to be upheld in Samburu County Public Service the Board recommends the following—
(a) The board to be facilitated with the necessary requirements to achieve its core functions and mandates
(b) Board needs more training and capacity building programmes for better service delivery
(c)  The board will be engaging in civic education to enlighten the public on the values and principles referred in Article 10 and 232.
(d) The Board shall enhance its communication systems to make sure that persons with disability and minority communities are informed of job opportunities and other services available for them
(e)  All entities of County Government ought to be involved in the promotion and compliance of the above values and principles
(f)   Board’s budget should not be altered after it has been approved.
7.0 CONCLUSION
The Samburu County Public Service Board is committed to ensuring that the national values and principles of governance and of Public Service are adhered to through the County Public Service. In light of the above the Board intends to vigorously do the following:
(a)     Effective ways of promoting the values and principles in article 10 and 232.
(b)     Hold public Barazas and embrace programs that enlighten the public and instil in them the duty to uphold the values and principles.
(c)      Advising the County Government on its obligation under international treaties and conventions on good governance in the County Public service.
(d)     On a continuous basis the Board shall be assessing and inspecting the status of compliance with the values and principles.
(e)      Any violations to the above values shall be promptly investigated and necessary recommendations and/or actions to be taken.
(f)       Perform any other duty that it considers necessary for promotion and compliance of the values and principles of public service.
8.0 APPROVAL AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT
The Samburu County Public Service Board approved and adopted this Report on 26th November, 2014 for onward transmission to the Samburu County Assembly and to be gazetted in the Kenya Gazette. 
Bernard Lenaronkoito–Chairman.
Alice Lenanyokie–Vice-Chairperson.
Patrick Lekimain–Member.
Samuel Lempushuna–Member.
Timothy Lesingiran–Member.
David Lenemiria–Member.
Dorcas Lekisanyal–Secretary.
References:
The Constitution of Kenya, (2010). Nairobi. The Government Printer.
The County Government Act, (2012), Nairobi, The Government Printer.
Dated the 10th December, 2014.
ALICE LENANYOIKE,
MR/6724229                                          Vice-Chairperson, CPSB.

