
				Page: 24Gazette Notice No. 76
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED WIND FARM ON L.R. Nos. KAJIADO/LOODARIAK/149 AND KAJIADO/LOODARIAK/1665 AT LOODARIAK SUB – LOCATION, KEEKONYOKIE CENTRAL LOCATION, KAJIADO NORTH DISTRICT, KAJIADO COUNTY
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Chagem Power Limited) isproposing to develop a 50MW capacity wind farm on a 40Ha piece of land excised from L.R. Nos. Kajiado / Loodariak / 149 and Kajiado / Loodariak / 1665 and jointly owned by the directors of the firm. The land is situated approximately 10 Kilometres away from Kona Baridi, off Magadi Road, in Loodariak Sub-Location, Keekonyokie Central Location, Kajiado North District in Kajiado County.
The major components of the proposed 50MW Wind Energy Project will include the following: One 120M tall wind logging mast, Improvement of the 10KM earth access road, Transportation of the wind logging mast and wind turbines to the site from Mombasa, On – site sub-station, Underground electrical cabling between turbines and on – site substation, Site office block, Internal access roads development, A 2KM transmission line, Concrete bases and Wind turbines,
Below is a summary of the anticipated impacts and the proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Erosion of loose soils


Landscape disturbed surface on completion of the construction phase of the project;
Provision of suitable storm water drainage channels to effectively discharge water safely;
Standard landscaping will be conducted after project completion to control any chance of soil movement;
Re-plant shrubs and grasses on disturbed surface (i.e. along the road rehabilitation access road);
Speed limits for vehicles / traffic using the 10KM access earth road; and
Erection of bumps on the 10KM access road.


Increased noise and vibration


Induction / training of staff on SHE issues;
Use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) by construction workers and where appropriate operation staff;
Construction activities to be carried out during daytime (8am to 6pm);
Noise monitoring at the site and equipment to maintain / check noise emissions levels;
Regular maintenance of equipment to keep it in good working condition;
Operators of construction equipment to be made aware of the potential noise issues and how to minimize noise emissions; and
Install modern Vest as turbines which are associated with low noise levels.


Visual intrusion


Proper siting of the project components (a consultant has been hired to undertake micro-siting and design of the wind farm); and
Rehabilitate borrow pits and other disturbed surfaces.


Decreased air quality


Implement vehicular speed reduction methods, e.g. speed restriction, erecting signposts, monitoring, and policing during construction in order to reduce dust generation;
Regular maintenance of project vehicles;
Approved method of disposal should be used to dispose of used oil filters and oil drained from project vehicles;
Provision of PPEs to the staff;
Development of dust management plan for construction and operation phases;
Bulk earthworks for exaction should be carried out in a controlled manner; and
Dust suppression i.e. frequent wetting dusty areas.


Solid and liquid waste generation


Waste segregation at source;
Waste reuse, reduce and recycle; and
Contract a NEMA certified waste collection firm to collect solid waste for disposal.


Decreased water quality


Minimize water pollution;
obtain water from a nearby borehole on a pay as you use basis;
Drill a borehole on the site to ensure no stress is placed upon the local community’s water sources;
Provide mobile toilets on site during construction phase;
Septic tank used during operation;
Install oil traps on waste oil drainage;
Use drip trays to collect waste oil and lubricants from machinery during servicing;
Proper labeling of containers for holding hazardous materials; and
Servicing of machinery and equipments to be done at a designated place with a paved surface and oil interceptors.


Loss of ecology (ecosystem; fauna and flora)


Restore disturbed land surfaces on completion of construction activities;
Replant some indigenous vegetation in the area;
Wind farm site boundary will not be fenced, this will allow free access to grazing of livestock and wildlife on site to take place during operation stage; and
Alternative sources of energy apart from firewood to be provided to project staff.


Occupational safety and health risks (i.e.
accidents, exposure to pollutants).


Induction / training of staff on SHE issues;
Use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) by construction workers and where appropriate operation staff;
Install modern Vest as turbines which are associated with low noise levels.
Construction activities to be carried out during daytime (8am to 6pm);
Noise monitoring at the site and equipment to maintain / check noise emissions levels;
Regular maintenance of equipment to keep it in good working condition; and
Operators of construction equipment to be made aware of the potential noise issues and how to minimize noise emissions.


Increased water and energy consumption


Pay as you use water from the nearby borehole;
Rainwater harvesting;
Enough water storage tanks to be constructed ;
Avoid unnecessary wastage of water during operation; and
Residuals from diesel and lubricants used on site should be stored safely awaiting appropriate disposal in order to prevent migration of contaminant hydrocarbons into the site soil and water bodies;
Regular servicing of vehicles and machinery;
Switch off idle vehicles and machinery; and
Use efficient energy consuming equipments.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6254990           National Environment Management Authority.

