
				Page: 2373GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7336
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED NITHI SMALL RIVER  HYDRO POWER PROJECT IN THARAKA NITHI COUNTY.
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Frontier Investment Management, is proposing Nithi Small River Hydro Power Project, in Tharaka Nithi County. The Project will consist of the following elements of infrastructure:  An intake structure, A low pressure pipeline which will follow the contour, A de-sanding structure; A buffer tank,  A steel penstock (high-pressure pipeline), a power station and  a power transmission line. The intake structure; low pressure pipeline, de-sanding structure and buffer tank will be constructed within the MKFR while the penstock and the power station will be constructed within the farming zone outside the MKFR boundary.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental/ Social Issue 


Mitigation Measure 


Increased soil erosion
and landslides
 


Install soil erosion control structures like gabions and check dams.
Install and regularly empty sediment traps in surface drains of the construction areas. The contractor should construct sediment traps along the pipeline route on the steep slopes to prevent and/or arrest any falling debris, soil or rocks from reaching the river and other smaller watercourses.
Proper design for storm water drainage facilities and maintenance during the construction phase are critical for mitigation.
Disposal of excavated/cut soil should be undertaken outside fragile ecosystems and water sources, under the direction of the resident engineer who should approve disposal sites.
Construction during heavy rains should be avoided as much as is possible as water logged soils are easily eroded.
Labour-intensive methods of excavation should be applied on the steep slopes, where necessary, to minimize disturbance of the soil by construction machinery.
Revegetation of areas where construction has been completed must happen as early as possible and progressively as the construction front for the low pressure pipeline moves.
Soil erosion control measures that have been installed during construction must be maintained and/or altered during operation to ensure that they remain effective.


Air quality impacts
 


Implement a journey management plan to include speed limits, as trucks moving at a low speed will generate less dust. Speed bumps must be Installing speed bumps at selected locations in order to reduce traffic speed, particularly near sensitive receptors such as schools and clinics.
Dust in areas with sensitive receptors must also be controlled by regularly (at least daily) sprinkling water during dry periods.
The existing access track will be upgraded to an all-weather standard up to the position of the buffer tank – thus, dust–generation in the MKFR during the dry season will be reduced.

Poaching and logging
 


Incorporate wildlife awareness training/sensitization programmes into the Contractor’s ESMP to address possible pressures on wildlife.
Implement education programmes for construction workers on, inter alia: respect for wildlife and vegetation, avoidance of fires and accidental damage, and generally restricting the footprint of the construction camp and work areas to that which is required.
The existing access road into the forest must be upgraded only as far as the proposed position of the buffer tank. The only other road that may be constructed is the road along the low pressure pipeline route (on top of the pipeline). No other roads may be constructed inside the MKFR.
The contractor and all other related personnel must be accompanied by a KFS–appointed guard at all times when entering the MKFR and must have appropriate identification as agreed with the KFS.
Apart from the KFS guard that will accompany the construction team, no firearms may be taken into the MKFR.
The developer must develop and implement a site access plan to prohibit/control public access into the MKFR. This plan must be developed in collaboration with the KWS and KFS to establish effective regulation of entry to the MKFR.


Impacts on terrestrial fauna
 


During construction, terrestrial fauna habitat disturbance should be minimised by restricting the project activities to only the maximum area required;
Working in bits to avoid long exposure of open trench to wild animal and in addition pits should be well barricaded overnight or during other work-off hours. Any borrow pits or geotechnical survey pits dug inside the national park should be restored to avoid animal injuries and death;
To minimise death of fauna, vegetation clearance should always be undertaken first, as this scares away most of the fauna, as opposed to direct use of graders to clear routes for access road construction, or direct dumping of construction materials and excavated soils;
The Developer should engage KWS and KFS supervisory construction crew should work closely with KWS and KFS officials to ensure no Hunting.
The construction crew should be encouraged and sensitized not to harass amphibians and reptiles.
Structures to be constructed within MFKR (a part from the weir) should be buried to minimize visual intrusion and danger to terrestrial fauna.


Impacts on fresh water ecology
 


During construction, aquatic fauna habitat disturbance should be minimised by restricting the project activities to only the specific areas of the river required;
Implement soil erosion control measures and reduce soil disturbance during construction activities by constructing sediment traps;
Install and regularly empty sediment traps in surface drains in and around roads and construction areas;
Proper design for storm water drainage facilities and maintenance during the construction phase are critical for mitigation;
Disposal of cut soil should be undertaken outside fragile ecosystems and water sources downstream, under the direction of the resident engineer who should approve disposal sites;
Design and implement an agreed compensational flow regime (with WRMA) during operation;
Manage operations to avoid rapid fluctuations in downstream flow;
There should be periodic monitoring of water flow, quality and temperature downstream to ascertain the right aquatic ecosystem conditions.
Conduct a periodic monitoring of water flow, quality and temperature downstream to ascertain the extent to which aquatic ecosystem conditions may have been changed.


Waste handling
 


In line with NEMA’s Waste Management Regulations, waste generated during construction and operation should be sorted (biodegradable, non-biodegradable, Metals, Glasses) by the contractor and disposed of appropriately at designated waste disposal sites.
NHPL should ensure that all wastes generated during construction activities such as conductors, steel and metallic bars, insulators and other accessories associated with transmission lines, are collected and disposed of appropriately at designated sites by a NEMA licensed waste handler.
All sanitary and food waste generated at labour campsites shall be collected and transported by the contractor to designated landfills/dumping sites within the project area; Some domestic waste will be, all plastic waste generated at campsites and in the course of undertaking works such as mineral water bottles, polyethylene bags, jerry cans, should be collected and sold either to the local people for re-use or taken for recycling in respective factories. NHPL must ensure that non-biodegradable waste is not disposed of in water bodies.
Human excreta should be managed using a mobile toilet and then disposed in pit latrines. Human waste must not be littered in bushes and water bodies.


Community land take for the upgrading of the access road to the power station
 


Comply with the Public Road and Access Act (Cap 399) that relates to the dedication, conservation and alignment access roads adjacent to land from the nearest part of a Public Road.
Consultation with the Tharaka Nithi County on road development within the project area.
Assess changes in traffic in the area and develop a traffic management plan; and all altered areas caused by road construction must be rehabilitated.
Consultation with the community members to identify whether there would be a need to carry out a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).


Social cohesion and integration
 


Develop a strong communication strategy which should entail working with local leaders among others in a bid to counter stereo-types and other negative practices.
There should be community empowerment through participation and engagement through a bottom-up consultation process.
Promoting and development meaningful interaction and “bridging” activities such as education, sports, recreational leisure activities
Mapping communities to ensure allocation of resources are done appropriately and equitably.
There should be a conflict resolution planning to prevent anticipated problems.
Ensure that response to crisis are done in a timely manner averts a lot of adverse effects. This can be achieved through putting in place a community intelligence monitoring system.
Proponent should have in place disaster preparedness and conflict prevention and management strategies in place.


Health and safety
 


All workers, including Sub-contractors and casual labourers should undergo an Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) induction before commencing work on site, which should include a full briefing on site safety and rules;
Personnel should only undertake tasks for which they are trained/qualified and a formal permit to work’ system will be in place.
Routine toolbox talks should be conducted on different topics for all workers prior to the start of the construction phase.
All accidents, near misses and incidents should be recorded and such records maintained as part of a health and safety management programme.
The required PPE should be provided and will be worn by personnel.
Local community members will be requested to suspend their activities within the project footprint during the construction phase. This is mainly for their safety.
A detailed construction schedule with associated activities will be developed and communicated to all affected individuals.


Community water infrastructure
 


Construction must be planned and programmed to prevent interruption of water supply to the community;
Co-operate with the Kamwene Water Supply and Sanitation Project (KWSSP) and the community to ensure minimal interruption of water supply during construction and operation.
The community should be well informed and notified in advance of any disruption of water supply during the upgrading process.
Alternative sources of water supply should be made available for the community for example using of water bowsers.
Develop and implement a community water supply plan and MOU stipulating how far will supply water to the community so as to manage expectations.



 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Tharaka Nithi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project. A copy of Environmental Assessment report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke and comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
for Director-General,
MR/8105137         National Environment Management Authority.

