
				Page: 2377GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7337
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED KENYATTA UNIVERSITY CHILDREN,  RESEARCH AND REFERRAL HOSPITAL AT KAMITI LOCATION IN KIAMBU COUNTY.
INITATION OF PUBLIC  COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Kenyatta University is proposing to put up a children, research and referral Hospital at Kamiti Location, Kiambu County which will cover about 15 acres of Kenyatta University land. according to the designs and drawings, the hospital building facility will comprise of rooms with large windows and well landscaped exterior and interior areas in order to enhance environmental protection and social well-being of the occupants. All the necessary sanitary facilities and all necessary waste disposal facilities and ample parking space, will be put in place.  In addition, there will be tarmac road access with gate and guard facilities for security and a life boundary fence.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental/Social Impact Aspect


Proposed Mitigation Measures 


Changes in hydrology and drainage


Harmonize site drainage design with the neighboring premises.
Direct storm water and surface runoff to the public drainage system.
Incorporate a storm water collection reservoir as part of the site plan.
Ensure close supervision of drainage maintenance.
Utilize storm water for irrigation of lawns and flower beds.
Minimize hard surfaces around the premises.
Ensure sewage and foul water do NOT enter into the drainage system.
Ensure close supervision of waste water septic tank and maintenance.
Indicate intentions to decommission on years in advance.
Undertake a decommissioning audit six months in advance.


Soil erosion


Control  the earthworks.
Landscaping to create contours towards the drainage systems.
Create embankments around the premises with excavated earth to prevent loss.
Maintain internal and immediate external drainage systems clear at all times.
Compact loose soils and apply binding materials.
As per the decommissioning report


Air Pollution (dust, emissions and particulate matter)


Delivery trucks to be covered.
Dusty building materials to be kept moist.
Control ALL points sources of emissions in the premises.
No (emitting) operations in the building.
As per the decommissioning report.


Noise pollution


Construction machinery and equipment be maintained at highest level of working conditions.
Construction time scheduling to suit the neigbourhood.
Provide construction workers with plugs/muffs as part of PPE.
Maintain monitoring of noise levels on annual basis.
Control points, events or other sources of noise.
As per the decommissioning report.


Water Pollution (Oil spills, silt, leachate from solid wastes, suspended matter, infiltration into water supply pipes, sewage discharge, etc.)


Proper storage, handling and disposal of oil and oil wastes from machinery.
Discourage servicing of machinery and vehicles on site.
Minimize soil/silt wash-down into open drains.
Avoid unnecessary wastage and spillage of water.
Sewer pipes not to discharge into drainage systems.
Solid waste holding bin be connected to the sewer lines for leachate discharge.


Waste Management,  Sanitation and Hygiene


Special attention on the sanitary facilities,
Earth excavate be dumped on pre-identified and approved land fill sites,
Construction debris and other inert materials (wood, steel bars, nails, papers, glass, etc. be recycled off site OR approved dumpsites,
Provide segregated waste holding units at strategic locations,
Some of the debris could be re-used
Solid waste holding bins (segregated into different compartments),
Engage approved refuse handling operators for the various waste,
Carry out annual waste audits,
Identify with the existing solid waste management mechanisms to adopt or otherwise,
Ensure safe disposal of the waste generated during the decommissioning process,
Everything is done in accordance to the decommissioning audit provision



Health and Safety

 


Provide appropriate sanitation facilities for the construction workers,
Ensure no stagnant water at any given time (mosquitoes could breed),
The contractor not to allow proliferation of pests and nuisance situation,
Provide and enforce application  of personal protective equipment,
Isolate the construction site for rest of the community for their safety,
Consult the neighborhood on regular basis for enhanced safety.
Truck drivers be instructed to observe utmost care for the safety of the residents during the construction.

 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project. A copy of Environmental Assessment report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke and comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/8105271         National Environment Management Authority.

