
				Page: 3385GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 10839
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF A BIOMASS POWER GENERATION STATION AT NG’AMBO LOCATION, MARIGAT DISTRICT
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed construction of a biomass power generation station project.
The project proposes to establish an 11.5 MW biomass gasification electricity plant in Ng’ambo Location of Marigat District to produce electricity from Prosopis juliflora for mini-grid rural electrification and supply for main grid.
The proposed project activity is located in Marigat location, sub-location Ng’ambo, in Baringo District, Rift Valley Province.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental issue


Mitigation Measures


Environmental considerations and sensitivity of the project area


All road works are to comply with approved Civil Engineering Standards.
The site development plan (SDP) and all other construction drawings shall be verified on site prior to the onset of any construction work.
Carry out geotechnical surveys along the routes of proposed roads.
Complete vegetation surveys and targeted flora surveys searching for significant plant Species. Any such species to be tagged and recorded.


Solid waste management


Provide compartmentalized litter bins in strategic places to allow sorting of the rubbish stream.
Recycle wastes that can be used again.
Designate certain areas as dumping sites.
Ensure all organic waste is composted.


Risks of oil spills and leakages


Spilt oil should be immediately be cleaned.
Provide spill kits in strategic places and train staff in their use.


Noise pollution


Major noise-producing equipments such as turbo generator, compressors are to be provided with suitable noise abatements.
Vehicles, earth moving machines and tractors should idle as little as possible.
Noisy activities will be scheduled to occur only during day time.


Dust emissions


Water roads under construction.
Provide workers with appropriate protective clothing.


Incident response procedures


The contractor must take corrective action to mitigate an incident appropriate to nature and scale of the incident and must also rehabilitate any residual environmental damage caused by the incident or by mitigation measures.
Contractor must also change operating procedures, where applicable, to prevent recurrence of incident.
Compile an Incident Report and investigate root cause of the incident.


Soil erosion


Monitor sites of bare soil and carry out restoration works, such as re-shaping the ground and planting grass and trees.


Solid waste generation


Provide compartmentalised litter bins in strategic places to allow sorting of the rubbish steam.
Recycle wastes that can be used again.
Designate certain places as dumping sites. Manage dumps to minimize vermin and odours or outsource municipal waste disposal service.
Ensure all organic waste is composted.


Risk of fire outbreaks


Develop and maintain early fire warning system.
Provide and maintain fire fighting equipment and ensure personnel are trained in its use.


Workers’exposure to accidents and health hazards


Induct workers on how to use machinery, vehicles and equipment.
Provide operating manuals and guidelines.
Ensure any Contractors operating on project site have completed and trained their staff in safe work methods.
Develop and implement a Health and safety Plan.


Waste water generation


Inspect septic tanks and soak pits and take corrective measures needed.


Storm water management


Design drainage system that conform to natural gradient and minimize slope length.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Rift Valley Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Baringo District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
O. Z. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR8042696
 National Environment Management Authority.

