
				Page: 3386GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 10840
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF A BIOMASS POWER GENERATION STATION AT MWAVUMBO LOCATION – KINANGO DISTRICT
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed construction construction of a biomass power generation station project.
The project proposes to produce 11.5MW from Prosopis juliflora which will be generated and used to serve companies around Mariakani area while the surplus power will be fed to the national grid through power purchase agreement (PPA).
The main power generating plant boiler and furnace will be located on L.R No. 11492/222 & 1 while auxiliary services will be set up on land provided by the community or outsourced to the community altogether. The site is about 1.6 km from KALUWORKS/MRM factories. Graphically, the site is in Kalalani sub-location, Mwavumbo location, Mariakani division in Kinango District plot L.R.11492/222.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Issues


Mitigation Measures


Water resources


Management of water usage. Avoid unnecessary wastage of water.
Roof catchments should be provided through installation of rainwater harvesting system.
Water conserving taps should be installed.
Recycling of waste water at construction phase.
Obtain necessary abstraction permits from relevant authorities.


Energy demand


Electrical appliances should be switched off when not in use.
The tenants should be encouraged to use energy conserving lamps for lighting.
Putting off all lights when not in use and when not needed.


Waste water


Use approved water treatments systems to ensure water discharged into the environment meet required standards as per NEMA Waste Water Management Regulations Rules 2006.
Regularly analyse waste water at NEMA Accredited Laboratories.
Seek Relevant discharge permits.


Change in hydrology/impended drainage


Proper installation of drainage structures.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures through proper design and maintenance.
Provide gratings to the drainage channels.


Noise pollution


Construction during day time.
Make the construction more labor intensive.
Use silencers in heavy machines.
Ear muffs and other ear protectors.


Air Pollution


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized.
Enclose the construction site with dust-proof net during the construction.
Equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Sprinkle the construction area with water to keep dust levels down.
Provided dust masks to all personnel in areas prone to dust emissions throughout the period of construction.
Construction workers should be provided with Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and be trained on occupational health and safety issues.
Regularly and using NEMA accredited labs carry out emissions/flu gases tests.


Oil pollution


Proper storage,  handling and disposal of new and used oil waste as stipulated in the regulations.
Maintain equipment to avoid leaks.
Maintenance of vehicles should be done in designated place within the plant.
Construct bund walls around all fuel holding units.
Install oil interceptors.


Soil disturbance


Provide compartmentalised litter bins in strategic places to allow sorting of the rubbish steam.
Recycle wastes that can be used again.
Designate certain places as dumping sites. Manage dumps to minimize vermin and odours or outsource municipal waste disposal service.
Ensure all organic waste is composted.


Fire safety and preparedness


Adapt effective emergence response plans.
Carry out Fire Audit to establish risk.
Install firefighting equipment as proposed elsewhere in the report sec.(5.6).
Maintain/Service firefighting equipment.
Develop emergency preparedness plan.
Provide emergency numbers and contact institution.


Road safety


Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles especially on the roads leading to the site.
Post billboards at the site to notify motorists and visitors about the development.


Public health, occupational health and safety


Obtain Registration of Workplace from DOHSS.
Develop relevant company policies.
Implement all necessary measures to ensure health and safety of the workers and the general public during construction and operation phase as stipulated in OSHA  and related laws
Constitute a Health and Safety Committee.
Adopt sound solid waste management plan to ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure use of standard construction materials and to the specification. Avoid undesirable , substandard, hazardous or unauthorized materials during construction and maintenance.
Provide full protective gear and the correct tools and operational instructions and manuals during construction.
Design of sewerage system  and neutralization plants should be as provided in the plans and should be constructed to the approved size and design, standard and of approved materials.
Fence off the construction site to keep off onlookers and members of the pubic or stray animals from the site.
Ensure occupation certificate is issued before occupancy or commencement of work.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Coast Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Kwale District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
O. Z. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR8042696
 National Environment Management Authority.

