
				Page: 1606GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  4853
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT L.R NO. 330/476 IN DAGORETTI, VALLEY ARCADE ALONG KOROSHO ROAD, HUNDRED AVENUE, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent Deshun Properties Company Limited, is proposing a ResidentialDevelopmentin Dagoretti, Valley Arcade along Korosho, Road, Hundred Avenue, Nairobi County.
The Project involves the development that will comprise of 3 blocks of ground plus seven storey two-three bed-roomed apartments with every floor consisting of four (4) units. Each unit will comprise two bedrooms, lounge, dining area, kitchen, bathroom and toilet. Each family unit will also have its own balcony. The total number of units for the three blocks will be ninety-six (96).
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Expected Negative Impacts


Recommended Mitigation Measures


Solid waste generation


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options:Provide solid waste handling facilities such as rubbish bags and skips.
Source separation and reduction.
Recycling.
Composting and reuse.
Combustion.
Sanitary land filling.


Ensure that solid wastes generated at the housing units are regularly disposed off appropriately at authorized dumping sites.
Ensure that occupants of each family unit manage their waste efficiently through recycling, reuse and proper disposal procedures.
Donate redundant but serviceable equipment to charities and institutions.
A private company to be contracted to collect and dispose solid waste on regular intervals.


Release of sewage into the environment


Provision of adequate and safe means of handling sewage generated at the apartments inform of proper connection to the existing sewer line serving the area.
Conduct regular inspections for sewage pipe blockages or damages and fix appropriately.
Ensure regular monitoring of the sewage discharged from the apartments to ensure that the stipulated sewage/effluent discharge rules and standards are not violated.


High demand for energy


Switch off electrical equipment, appliances and lights when not being used.
Install occupation sensing lighting at various locations such as storage areas which are not in use all the time.
Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points within the apartment instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.
Monitor energy use during the operation of the project and set targets for efficient energy use.
Sensitize suite occupants to use energy efficiently.
Explore the possibility of using renewable sources of energy such as wind and solar energy.


High water demand


Promptly detect and repair water pipes and tank leaks.
Residents to conserve water e.g. by avoiding unnecessary toilet flushing.
Ensure taps are not running when not in use.
Install water conserving taps that turn-off automatically when water is not being used.
Install a discharge meter at water outlets to determine and monitor total water usage.
Create water conservation awareness


Increased health and safety impacts


Implement all necessary measures to ensure health and safety of workers and the general public during operation of the  project as stipulated in Factories and Other Places of Work Act Cap 514.


Increased pressure on infrastructure


Coordinate with other planning goals and objectives for the region.
Upgrade existing infrastructure and services, if and where feasible.


Insecurity


Appoint security personnel operating 24 hours.
Body-search the workers on entry, to avoid getting weapons on site, and leaving site to ensure nothing is stolen.
Ensure only authorized personnel get to the site.


Air pollution


Suitable wet suppression techniques need to be utilized in all exposed areas
All unnecessary traffic must be strictly limited on site speed controls are to be enforced.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7268924         National Environment Management Authority.

