
				Page: 1588GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  4748
MINISTRY OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS, COMMERCE AND TOURISM
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL MICE COMMITTEE AND SECRETARIAT
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for general information that the Cabinet Secretary for East African Affairs, Commerce and Tourism has established a Committee to be known as the National MICE Committee and Secretariat.
The committee shall consist of the following members—
Chairperson:
Fred Simiyu, representing Institute of Meeting Professionals.
Members:
Amb. Leonard Ngaithe, representing Ministry of East African Committee, Commerce and Tourism.
Roger Steadman, representing Business, Professionals and Research Associations.
Mike Macharia, Kenya Association of Housekeepers and Caterers (KAHC).
Agatha Juma, Kenya Tourism Federation (KTF).
Sarah Tomno, Private Sector.
Mbuvi Ngunze, representing Transport and Communication.
Anna Othoro, representing Counties.
Robert Marini, representing hard hit markets.
Terryanne Chebet, representing Public Relations Practitioners.
Terms of reference:
The terms of reference of the committee are to—
(a) provide strategic direction for the development of Kenya MICE agenda;
(b) provide strategic input in raising funds for the formulation and execution of MICE strategy;
(c)  resource mobilization for expansion and/or modernization of MICE infrastructure and/or physical capacity in Kenya.
(d) Formulate policy framework critical in attainment of the multiplier effect of MICE to the GDP of Kenya and the Vision 2030.
Powers of the committee:
In the execution of its terms of reference, the committee shall, with the approval of the Minister for Tourism have the power to—
(a) co-opt members or appoint nominees as it deems fit only for specialized aspects of its terms of reference;
(b) Source additional funding for its activities;
(c)  do or perform such other things or acts are necessary or expedient for the execution of its terms of reference.
Reporting:
The committee shall execute its terms of reference with all due deligence and speed and shall submit to the Cabinet Secretary, East African Affairs, Commerce and Tourism its annual report not later than 31st December of each year.
The term of office of the committee shall be for a period of three (3) years, with effect from 26th May, 2015.
Secretariat:
The Secretariat of the committee shall be based at the Kenyatta International Convention Centre (KICC).
Dated the 20th May, 2015.
PHYLLIS KANDIE,
Cabinet Secretary for East African Affairs, Commerce and Tourism.

