
				Page: 1667GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4347
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RELOCATION OF DHL REFUELLING SERVICES FACILITY FROM EABL RUARAKA SITE TO DHL KASARANI SITE IN NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Total Kenya) is proposing to relocate DHL Refueling Services Facility from EABL Ruaraka Site to DHL Kasarani Site in Nairobi County.
The re-location project shall involve the following activities; Removal and transfer of a 54cm³ above ground fuel storage tank, canopy,dispensing pumps, offloading pumps, tank saddles, and other equipment from Ruaraka to Kasarani, fabrication of an additional 50cm³ above ground storage tank,installation of the two tanks, high speed twin fuel dispensing pumps, fuel offloading facilities, canopy, safety signs and other equipment, Piping works, installation of an oil-water separator (interceptor),calibration of the two tanks,branding of the tanks, pumps and canopy with total logos and safety signs and  remedial works at the Ruaraka site.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Risks associated with transfer of installations


The tank shall be removed using a crane to reduce risk of damage.
Avoid unnecessary movement anddisturbance of soil surface. Watering should be done where appropriate to control dust.
Degassing of the tank to reduce occupational hazards.
Resurface/pave open areas after thecompletion of the project.
Transfer of these installations shall be escorted and shall be done through ‘wide road’ carriage to warn other motorists to slow down to avoid bad incidents.


Interruption of existinglogistics


A new tank 54m3 shall be installed at the new facility (Kasarani) tested and commissioned to ensure that the facility isoperating efficiently.
Ruaraka facility shall be running as usualwhile awaiting completion of the relocationof the second tank.
Ruaraka site shall be shut down uponconfirmation that indeed the Kasarani site is fully functional.


wastes and dust management


Ensure proper handling of the demolished materials and have an authorized and guided transportation and disposal away from the site area.
Provide personal protective equipment,materials and clothing such as nose masks and goggles to workers to ensure their safety.
Regular and prompt maintenance of construction machinery and equipment.
Control over areas generating dust particles by sprinkling water to reduce dust.
Enclose such areas to mitigate effects of wind and hence controlling propagation of dust.
A reputable solid waste handler will be contracted to regularly collect solid waste.
The materials shall be properly segregated and separated to encourage recycling of some of them.
Some demolished stone materials shall beused as backfills.



Soil erosion


Avoid unnecessary movement of soil materials from the site.
Resurface/pave open areas after thecompletion of the project.
Introduce suitable and well-managed vegetation to generate surface covers on theopen areas and to control soil movement byerosion agents including water and wind.
Provide suitable storm water drainage channels and maintain them regularly to avoid blockages.


Noise andvibration


Machineries and equipment in use shall be maintained to reduce noise resulting from friction.
There shall be no unnecessary horning of Vehicles.
Provision of bill boards at the construction site gates notifying of the construction activity and timings.
Shielding of the areas under works to reduce noise propagation shall be done.


Leaks from installations


Regular tests to ensure integrity of the installations such as air separators, valves, couplings, dispensing hoses and storage tanks shall be done.
Drops or wetness to ensure no leakageshall be checked regularly.
Inventory management / stock reconciliation shall be done daily to
ensure no leakages and to monitor available stocks.
Installations shall be made of strongmaterial such as steel to ensure no leaks.
Sound engineering shall be put in place.


Risk of fire


Workers shall be sensitized on fire risks and use firefighting equipment.
“No Smoking” rule shall be observed.
Precautionary signs shall be well displayed, clean and easily legible to the customer.
There will be no use of mobile phones atthe forecourt.
All electrical components at the site shall be of appropriate quality to minimize risks associated with faulty electrical fittings.
All cables serving the pumps shall be well insulated and in sealed conduits.


Security


Tight security measures shall be observed by contracting a security firm to provide security guards at the facility.
These security guards shall regulatemotor vehicle and people entry and exit into the facility.
Any suspicious characters shall be reported to the management and police for appropriate action.


Traffic flow management


There shall be sufficient parking space
Unnecessary delays shall be avoided at the fueling bay.
One staff shall be assigned the role of  traffic management.
Management shall ensure that there will be minimal blockages if any at the entrance and the exit.
Forecourt shall be kept clean, with no litter, oil or spillage.
Engines shall not be running while the vehicles are at the fueling bay.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048087
National Environment Management Authority.

