
				Page: 1664GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4345
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RELOCATION OF WILSON AIRPORT RE-FUELLING SERVICE DEPOT IN NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Total Kenya Limited) is proposing to relocate their Wilson Airport Aviation Re-fuelling Services Depot from its current site to a different permanent site within the airport as per the current Kenya Airports Authority layout planning for the airport.
The proposed airport re-fuelling services depot facility shall include the following main features:
Four x 60 m³ capacity above ground horizontal storage tanks mounted on reinforced concrete saddles for Jet A-1 storage.
Two x 10 m³ capacity above ground horizontal storage tanks mounted on reinforced concrete saddles for Diesel storage.
Three x 30 m³ capacity above ground horizontal storage tanks mounted on reinforced concrete saddles for storage of fire fighting water.
A pump house and drum shed.
Two x 40 foot containers for spare parts.
A road truck loading/offloading service bay and bowser parking yard.
A site office for the depot staff.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation Measures 


Risks associated with transfer of installations


The tank shall be removed using a crane to reduce risk of damage.
Unnecessary movement and disturbance of soil surface shall be avoided. Watering shall be done where appropriate to control dust.
Degassing of the tank to reduce occupational hazards shall be done.
Resurface / pave open areas after the completion of the project.
Transfer of these installations shall be escorted and shall be done through ‘wide road’ carriage to warn other motorists to slow down to avoid bad incidents.


Interruption of existing logistics


The relocation shall be done in phases to ensure no interruption of the ongoing operations.
The current facility shall be running as usual while awaiting completion and commissioning of the new site.
The current site shall be shut down upon confirmation that indeed the new site is fully functional.


Generated wastes and dust


Ensure proper handling of the generated wastes and have an authorized and guided transportation and disposal away from the site area.
Provide personal protective equipments, materials and clothing such as nose masks and goggles to workers to ensure their safety.
Regular and prompt maintenance of construction machinery and equipment.
Control over areas generating dust particles by sprinkling water to reduce dust.
Enclosure of such areas so as to mitigate effects of wind and hence controlling propagation of dust.
A reputable solid waste handler will be contracted to regularly collect solid waste.
The materials shall be properly segregated and separated to encourage recycling of some of them.


Soil erosion


Unnecessary movement of soil materials from the site shall be avoided.
Open areas shall be resurfaced / paved after the completion of the project.
Suitable and well-managed vegetation to generate surface covers on the open areas and to control soil movement by erosion agents including water and wind shall be introduced.
Suitable storm water drainage channels shall be provided and maintained regularly to avoid blockages.


Surface drainage system


Drainage channels shall be installed in all areas that generate or receive surface water such as car parking and driveways
Drainage channels shall be covered with gratings to prevent occurrence of accidents and dirt that would compromise flow of runoff.
The channels shall be designed with regards to the peak volumes such as periods or seasons when there is high intensity of rainfall for avoid overflow.
The drainage channels shall be self-cleaning which means they shall have suitable gradient to avoid blockages.
Suitable storm water drainage channels shall be provided so as to effectively discharge water to safe areas.


Noise and vibration


Machineries and equipment in use shall be maintained to reduce noise resulting from friction.
There shall be no unnecessary horning of vehicles.
Provision of bill boards at the construction site gates notifying of the construction activity and timings shall be displayed.
Shielding of the areas under works to reduce noise propagation shall be done.


Leaks from installations


Regular tests to ensure integrity of the installations such as air separators, valves, couplings, dispensing hoses and storage tanks shall be done
Drops or wetness at the above ground tanks to ensure no leakage shall be checked regularly.
Inventory management / stock reconciliation shall be done daily to ensure no leakages and to monitor available stocks.
Installations shall be made of strong material such as steel to ensure no leaks
Sound engineering shall be put in place.


Cross contamination


Color codes for product storage tank identification shall be used.
Density tests to confirm the quality of the product being offloaded shall be done always.


Accidental spills


Reliable operations and effective written operating procedures shall be adhered to.
Good preventive and predictive maintenance techniques.
Commitment to safety.
Oil interceptors shall be provided.
Enough lighting and in working condition shall be ensured.
Floors and walls shall be kept clean.


Risk of fire


The following installations / facilities shall be made at strategic locations as a fire risk measure:
Smoke detectors.
Gas detection system.
Fire alarms.
Firefighting equipment.
water pump and hosepipe.
water tank with large volume of water.
Workers shall be sensitized on fire risks and use firefighting equipment.
“No Smoking” rule shall be observed.
Precautionary signs shall be well displayed,  clean and easily legible to the customer.
There will be no use of mobile phones at fuel storage yard.
All electrical components at the site shall be of appropriate quality to minimize risks associated with faulty electrical fittings.
All cables serving the pumps shall be well insulated and in sealed conduits.


Emergency response plan


Provision of security throughout the project implementation shall be done
Provision of emergency numbers at strategic points shall be done.
All workers shall have access to communication facilities (phones etc.) for quick emergency response.
Emergency Stop Buttons shall be installed.
Staff shall be trained on how to use them.
A well equipped First Aid kit shall be maintained.
Safety precautions shall be observed during offloading of trucks.


Traffic flow management


There shall be sufficient parking space
Unnecessary delays shall be avoided at the fueling bay.
One staff shall be assigned the role of traffic management.
Fueling point shall be kept clean, with no litter, oil or spillage.


Security


Tight security measures shall be observed by contracting a security firm to provide security guards at the facility.
These security guards shall regulate motor vehicle and people entry and exit in to the facility.
Any suspicious characters shall be reported to the management and police for appropriate action.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048086
National Environment Management Authority.

