
				Page: 1673GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4351
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED WIKITHUKI IRRIGATION PROJECT SITUATED IN WIKITHUKI SUB LOCATION, KYENINI LOCATION, MUSAVANI DIVISION, TSEIKURU DISTRICT IN KITUI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (National Irrigation Board) proposes to put up an Project in Wikithuki sub location, Kyenini location, Musavani Division, Tseikuru District in Kitui County.
The project will be constructed in two phases and will entail among other things the abstraction of water from Tana River through a pumping station to stilling basins before being conveyed through a system of main and tertiary canals for application to the field through open furrow system. A boaster station will be constructed to raise water to other basins for application to the fields through drip and sprinkler irrigation system.The two phases of the project are expected to bring the irrigated land to a total of 900 acres, 500 acres of which is designed to use canal and furrow irrigation system. 400 acres will be based on a combination of drip and sprinkler systems of irrigation. The main components to be constructed in each of the phases considered in this design are: intake sump, pump house, pump, receptor basins, rising mains; road and their crossing canals, division boxes, scheme office and store, boaster station, design of sprinkler irrigation system, scheme electric fencing, bush clearing and land levelling, roads and culvert crossings
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Water pollution


Limit number of vehicles and area of construction.
Compaction of loose material & Diversion of storm water flows from construction sites.
Hazardous wastes to be properly disposed by a licensed waste handler.
Apply appropriate irrigation management.
Ensure appropriate agricultural practices and control of inputs.
Adhere to waste discharge standards.


Loss of trees and greenery beauty


Minimize number of trees cut.
Revegetation.


Water borne diseases


Construction of public convenience for both genders.


Siltation


Ensure proper design and layout of field to allow for self cleaning of canal.
Ensure appropriate terracing if possible.
Ensure water application rate does not exceed soil intake rate.
Upgrade the other technologies in future.
Manual desilting of canals.


Vector diseases


Manage irrigation water to avoid runoff or excessive application.
Avoid leakage leading to water logging.


Accidents and ill health


Consult with local community and health workers.
Provide HIV/AIDS awareness education to all farmers and workers on site.
Develop and implement an appropriate OS&H policy.


Chemical poisoning


Manage and use chemicals as recommended by manufacturers.
Develop and implement an appropriate OS&H policy.


Loss or disruption of important Communal pathways to watering points


Upgrade local facilities as part of irrigation’s social responsibility.
Provide safe crossing points and new pathways to ensure that communities are not cut off from each other or from community facilities and resources due to pipe networks.


Aquatic fauna


Manage handling,application and disposal of agrochemicals and wastewater as per design and specifications.


Nuisance of Smoke, dust and noise


Control and limit burning activities.
Control transport movement and hours of operation.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kitui County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048151
National Environment Management Authority.

