
				Page: 1659GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4570
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(CAP. 286)
COMPLETION OF PART DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(PDP No. N 644/2014/01 for Proposed Site for Nyamache Local Physical Development Plan).
NOTICE is given that the above-mentioned development plan was on 11th June, 2014, completed.
The development plan relates to land situated in Bobasi Sub-County,  covering sections of Masige West and East Wards, Bassi Central and Bassi Bogetaorio wards within Kisii County.The plans covers an area of approximately 3 square Kilometers.
Copies of the part development plan have been deposited for public inspection at the County Executive Committee Member for Lands, Director of Physical Planning, Housing and Urban Development, Lands office, Kisii County, Director of Physical Planning, Ardhi House, Fifth Floor, Nairobi, Director of Physical Planning, Kisii County, the County Physical Planning office, Kisii and Sub-County Administrator, Bobasi Sub-County.
The copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons interested at the offices of the County Executive Committee Member for Lands, Director of Physical Planning, Housing and Urban Development, Lands office, Kisii County, Director of Physical Planning, Ardhi House, Fifth Floor, Nairobi, Director of Physical Planning, Kisii County, the County Physical Planning office, Kisii and Sub-County Administrator, Bobasi Sub-County, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. Monday to Friday.
Any interested person who wishes to make any representation in connection with or objections to the above-named part development plan may send such representations or objections in writing to be received by the County Executive Committee Member for Lands, Physical Planning, Housing and Urban Development, Physical Planning Officer, P.O. Box 2180−40200, Kisii, within sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this notice and such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
N. W. KAMAU,
MR/5048285 
for Director of Physical Planning.

