
				Page: 1671GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4350
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED BADASA CLUSTER IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT IN MARSABIT CENTRAL DISTRICT, MARSABIT COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (National Irrigation Board) is proposing to implement the Cluster Irrigation Development Project aimed at developing two irrigation schemes within Marsabit Central District with a combined irrigable area of 300 ha. Songa scheme targets to develop a net irrigable area of 150 Ha, and will draw water from Songa dam. Badasa scheme targets to develop a net irrigable area of 150 Ha, and will draw water from Badasa dam. The proposed irrigation project is based on drip irrigation system which shall be adopted since; it is already under practice in the project area; Water is not available in plenty hence a system that is efficient in water use is preferred; Since pumping to great heads for sprinkler will lead to high operation and maintenance cost which may not be sustainable
Below is a summary of the anticipated impacts and the proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Proposed Mitigation Measures 


Interference with the physical setting


The design shall not hinder drainage, change the topography or introduce physical changes that are not in harmony with the physical setting of the Project area.
The structures to be developed shall blend in with the surrounding.
Restoration shall be undertaken to retain the original setting.


Interruption of existing infrastructure


Formal request for permission to cross, break in and build the irrigation infrastructure should be sought from affected property owners.
Formal engagement of  land and other property owners neighbouring the pipeline.
Passing of relevant information to each of the affected parties.
Develop a work-plan to ensure smooth execution of the construction; and
On completion of works, each property owner should be contacted again to give views and if complains arise the contractor asked to address the same.



Soil erosion
 


Implement erosion control measures in erosion prone areas.
Construct soil conservation measures at stockpiled sites.
Topsoil must be reinstated and rehabilitated and rehabilitated on top of sub soil.
All excavation works must be properly backfilled and compacted.


Soil compaction
 


Vehicles must be kept on existing roads or tracks where possible.
Minimize compaction during stockpiling by working the soil in the dry state.
Avoid unnecessary vehicle movement.
Rip compacted areas to reduce runoff and re-vegetate where required.


Contractor's camps
 


Have comprehensive waste management and sanitation plan and facilities.
All storage tanks and equipment should have correct labels and Material Safety Data Sheets.
Adequate emergency response plan should be in place in the camps.
Employ best practice management "housekeeping" in all the camps.
Remove camps after use and the land restored to its previous condition or better.


Vegetation loss
 


The contractor should ensure that vegetation is cleared only where necessary and new trees should be planted in areas adjacent to the cleared ones.


Extraction of natural resources
 


Obtain authorization from the Department of Mines prior to any blasting activity shall be obtained.
A registered blaster Geology shall supervise all blasting and rock-splitting operations at all times.
The Contractor shall ensure that emergency services are notified, in writing prior to any blasting activities commencing on site.
The Contractor shall ensure that adequate warning is provided to the local communities prior to all blasting.
The Contractor shall use blast mats for cover material during blasting.


Solid wastes
 


Employ an integrated waste management strategy.
Provide litter collection facilities such as bins.
Chemical or hazardous wastes shall not be burnt on site or dump in open pits.
Maximize the re-use of all excavated materials in the works.


Wastewater
 


All grey water runoff or uncontrolled discharges from the site/working areas to water courses should be contained and properly channelled.
Water containing such pollutants as cements, concrete, lime, chemicals and fuels shall be discharged into a conservancy tank for removal from site.
Potential pollutants of any kind and in any form shall be kept, stored and used in such a manner that any escape can be contained and the water table not endangered.
Wash areas shall be placed and constructed in such a manner so as to ensure that the surrounding areas (including groundwater) are not polluted.


Oil spills
 


Vehicle maintenance should be done on purpose-built impervious concrete platforms with oil and grease traps.
Standard operating practices for refueling mobile equipment such as a minimum 15m from any water channel should be practiced.
Operator training is an important aspect of preventive approach and should be put into used before assignment or in the course of duty.
All above surface tanks should be bounded and mounted on paved surfaces.
Ensure that all equipment are in good condition, clean and free from leaks
Have in place oil spill containment and clean up equipment at the camp sites.


Air quality and dust
 


Train workers on management of air pollution from vehicles and machinery.
Cover vehicles delivering soil materials to reduce dust emissions.
Activities generating dust to be carried out in calm weather.
Provide dust masks to all personnel on dust-prone work sites.
Avoid removal of vegetation until such time as clearance is required and exposed surfaces shall be re-vegetated or stabilized as soon as practically possible.


Noise and vibrations
 


Keep noise levels to within acceptable limits.
Equipment should be maintained regularly to reduce noise resulting from friction.
Workers in the vicinity of high-level noise to wear Personal Protective Equipment.
Limit pickup trucks and other small equipment to an idling time.
No unnecessary hooting by project and resident vehicles.
Any complaints received by the Contractor regarding noise will be recorded and communicated to the Resident Engineer.


Occupational health and safety
 


Contractor to establish a comprehensive Health and Safety Plan.
Ensure compliance with all standards and health and safety regulations.
Establish and enforce a strict code of conduct for all project drivers including outside suppliers delivering materials.


HIV/AIDS
 


Education and sensitization of workers and the local communities on STIs, provide condoms to the project team and the public in conjunction with local NGO’s dealing with HIV/AIDS.
Where possible conduct regular sensitization campaigns and monitoring and evaluation of the modes used during the two year course of the project;
Formation of peer groups from among the project staff to ensure continuity in training and awareness raising.
The contractor has to institute HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention campaign amongst workers for the duration of the contract e.g. erect and maintain HIV/AIDS information posters at prominent locations as specified by the Resident Engineer.


Pollution by pesticides


Adopt an integrated pest management system, eco-farming and Adopt biological control and improved agricultural practices.


Land use conflicts
 


Control land use conflicts through Land use planning that should be participatory to designate areas for ecological, grazing and farming.


Water use conflicts
 


Encourage community participation in the project operation and develop an established community conflict resolution system .


Human wildlife conflict
 


Collaborate with KWS, KFS and other relevant government agencies in managing wildlife; create buffer zones, providing separate watering points for fauna.


Demolition waste (decommissioning)
 


Use of an integrated solid waste management system.
All structures that will not be used for other purposes must be removed and recycled/reused as far as possible.
All foundations must be removed and recycled, reused or disposed of at a licensed disposal site.
Where recycling/reuse is not possible, the materials should be taken to a licensed waste disposal site.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Marsabit County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048151
National Environment Management Authority.

