
				Page: 1662GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4207
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MULTIPLE COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT (MALL, HOTEL, PETROL STATION AND BAR & RESTAURANT) ON L. R. NO. 13136/15 IN JUJA, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Juja City Mall Limited)is proposing to construct a Multiple Commercial Development (Mall, Hotel, Petrol Station and Bar & Restaurant) On L. R. No. 13136/15 in Juja, Kiambu County
The proposed project involves development of a mall, hotel, petrol station, bar & restaurant and the associated facilities:The proposed mallshall have the ground, 1st and 2nd floors. The ground and 1st floors shall each accommodate a supermarket, shops and washrooms while the 1st floor shall accommodate shops and offices.proposed hotel shall be a block with ground, 1st, 2nd and 3rd floors. The ground floor shall accommodate meeting rooms, waiting area, conference facilities, restaurant, business center and administration offices; while the 1st floor shall accommodate residents’ lounge, gym and rooms. The 2nd & 3rd floors shall each accommodate hotel rooms and a two-bedroom unit. The proposed project shall also involve construction of a grease trap where all the water from the kitchen shall be channeled before discharging to the wastewater treatment system.proposed petrol stationshall have a canopy with six pump islands, a tyre centre, car wash bay, service bay, a cafeteria, convenient store, ATM lobbies, an office, police post, guard room and washrooms.proposed Bar and restaurant shall have a bar and restaurant, kitchen, barbeque and washrooms. A waste water treatment plant shall also be constructed.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Waste management


Design of sewerage system should be sound in terms of adequacy, gradient materials and standards and should connect to the proposed wastewater treatment system and should be monitored regularly to avoid leakages and spills
Engage the services of NEMA registered waste collector for disposal of solid waste
Construction of adequate and standard wastewater treatment plant/system
Full compliance with the law and all regulations


Traffic
 


Provide adequate parking and driveways
Control and management of traffic through enforcement of speed limits
Provide bill boards at the site/entrance to notify motorists about the development


Soil disturbance
 


Control earthworks &compact loose soils
Install drainage structures properly
Landscaping on project completion
Control and manage excavation activities
Control activities especially during rainy conditions
Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures/means where necessary.
Ensure standard appropriate practices on the provided gardens


Air pollution
 


Enclose the site with dust-proof net during construction
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase of excavated areas during dry conditions
Control speed and operation of construction vehicles
Prohibit idling of vehicles
Ensure sound condition of construction machinery and equipment
Engage sensitive construction workers.


Noise pollution
 


Erect suitable barriers to control noise
Sensitize drivers of construction machinery on effects of noise
Maintain plant equipment (if present)
Construction activities to be restricted to daytime
Workers in the vicinity of or involved in high-level noise to wear safety & protective gear.


Water resources
 


Management of water usage. Avoid unnecessary wastage
Recycling of water at the construction phase where possible
Make use of roof catchments to provide water i.e. for general purpose


Fuel, Oil, fats & greases pollution


Proper storage, handling and disposal of new oil and used oil wastes
Maintain plant and equipment to avoid leaks
Maintenance of construction vehicles should be carried out in the contractors yard (off the site)
Provide oil interceptors along the drains leading from petrol station & parking
Provide a grease trap for all wastewater from kitchen
Regular scheming of the oil interceptor& grease trap


Occupational Health and Safety
 


Train staff/workers on occupational health and safety
Provide full protective gear & workmen‘s compensation cover in addition to the right tools and operational instructions & manuals during construction
Engage the services of qualified personnel and/or ensure training
Ensure use of standard construction materials and to the specifications. Avoid undesirable, substandard, hazardous or unauthorized materials during construction & maintenance
Sensitized staff on social/health issues such as drugs
Ensure machinery and equipment servicing and maintenance as per schedules & legal requirements
Post strategically the OSHA Abstract & provide material safety data sheets
Post clear warning signs e.g. No unauthorized use of machines‘, ensure there are guards on moving parts e.t.c
Provide fully equipped First Aid kits & train staff on its use
Ensure adherence with the legal requirements- OSHA Act.
Sensitize residents on environmental management
Ensure certification and issuance of occupation certificates


Fire safety and preparedness
 


Install adequate and appropriate firefighting equipment as provided elsewhere in the report
Conduct training on firefighting, evacuation and emergency response & conduct regular fire drills
Adapt effective emergency response plan
Maintain/service firefighting machinery regularly
Provide emergency numbers at strategic points
Provide emergency control switch


Security


Provide security guards and facilities during the entire project cycle


Visual intrusion
 


Erect suitable perimeter walls especially during construction
Retain existing trees in areas not affected by the construction
Restore the site after completion by removal of all wastes and landscaping and the introduction of suitable vegetation

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048235 
National Environment Management Authority.

