
				Page: 1669GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4348
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF ALPHA FUEL  SERVICES LIQUID PETROLEUM GAS FILLING AND FUEL DEPOT IN KIRINYAGA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Alpha Fuel Services) is proposing to start a fuel depot and LPG filling and distribution station in Sagana Township, Kariti Location, Sagana Division of Kirinyaga West District in Kirinyaga County
The proposed LPG filling and fuel depot will comprise a perimeter fence , entry & exit gates, grass lawn , flower beds ,driveway and parking ,three steel LPG storage tanks capable of holding 200 metric tonnes, an LPG cylinder filling pump facility, piping ,empty and filled LPG cylinder storage facility,3 mild steel fuel storage tanks each with a capacity for 50 M3, fuel pumps, temporary office, emergency assembly point and fire fighting equipment ,wash rooms sewer lines and septic tank
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Solid waste and unused building materials


Ensure all the waste, damaged and unused building materials are removed safely from the site and sold out, reused or disposed properly.
Landscaping the site and road reserve.


Fire ,safety


Liaise with the local county government on awareness and training of locals on fire management.
Liaise with St John’s Ambulance on training on first aid from fire accidents and incidences.
Regularly inspect the storage tanks using approved leakage detection techniques and take appropriate remedial measures recommended.
Install signage and warning signs of areas likely to be prone to fire – , no carrying of matches no smoking, switch off engine , parking, toilets and such other warning signs.
Provide appropriate firefighting equipment and procedures and insure property.
Train staff in emergency preparedness.
Provide PPE for those working under hazardous condition.
Store LPG appropriately. Proponent should provide suitable fire extinguishers including ABC or CO2 and place them near probable source of ignition.
All the workers should be instructed on how to put off fires.
Warning signs of probable sources of fires should be placed within the premises.
Provide insurance cover for workers and the facility in case of fire


Noise levels


Handle cylinders carefully.
No handling of cylinders at night.


Security and conflicts


Vet recruits before engagement.
Employ locals as much as possible.


Environmental Aspects


Drainage channels could be maintained if premise is converted to another use.
If condemned, demolition and clearance should be done to rehabilitate the site for other use and dispose waste properly.
Dispose of gas properly.


Socio economic aspects


Building could be converted to another use.
Encourage workers to engage on other IGAs.
Workers should enlist with NHIF and NSSF SACCO society schemes.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kirinyaga County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5021892
National Environment Management Authority.

