
				Page: 1666GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4346
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED GARSEN – HOLA – GARISSA 220KV AND GARISSA – WAJIR 132 KV HIGH VOLTAGE TRANSMISSION LINES
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Electricity Transmission Company Limited)is proposing to construct high voltage 132kV and 220 kV transmission lines to link Garsen-Hola-Garisa-Wajir.
The length of the line is estimated at 526km and is expected to serve Garissa, Tana River and Wajir Counties which are currently off-grid and served only by isolated diesel generators.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Displacement of persons, Loss of Land and Land use rights


Community sensitization and awareness creation regarding the project.
Conduct a Ressetlement Action Plan (RAP) along the transmission line.
RAP Implementation (compensation of PAPs, contingency).
Re-alignment costs.


Occupational Health and Safety concerns


Supervision of compliance with occupational, health and safety standards.
Training of all workers on public occupational health and safety practices.


Loss of Flora and Fauna


Mark out areas for clearance and use manual method of clearing.
Undertake a selective clearance by removing tall woody species leaving saplings for quick regeneration of vegetation along the way leave.
Re-vegetation with indigenous species.


Soil Erosion


Soils excavated for the erection of towers should be used for re- filling and should not be left exposed to wind or water for long periods.
The contractor should avoid steep terrain during the transportation of construction material by using alternative routes or use light vehicles where appropriate.
Re-plant degraded areas with local species common in the area to complement natural vegetation regeneration to improve ground cover.


Water pollution


Adherance to EMCA Regulations on water quality.
Proper storage of all vessels containing oil, fuel and other hazardous chemicals.
Training of site workers on clearing up spillages.
Availling spillage kits including suitable PPE in storage areas.
Proper disposal of waste containers, litter and other waste generated during construction in compliance with waste management regulations.
Discharge of effluents to adhere to NEMA regulations.
Routine inspection.



Visual Impact


Extensive public consultation during the planning of power line and power line right-of-way locations.
After construction, natural vegetation should be restored in non operational areas of the site and/or additional landscape planting with local indigenous species used to improve views into the site.


Vehicular and Human Traffic Impacts


Extensive public consultation during the planning of power line and power line right-of-way locations
After construction, natural vegetation should be restored in non operational areas of the site and/or additional landscape planting with local indigenous species used to improve views into the site.


Liquid and solid wastes


Sensitization of workers on environmental protection and safety
Provision of solid waste collection facilities for the temporary storage of waste prior to disposal.
Liaison with the local county authorities on suitable dumping site for generated waste.
Excavated soil to be used for backfilling.


Noise and vibration


Use of noise protection devices when working with noisy equipment
The contractor will also be expected to use serviceable equipment with low noise emission and instruct truck and machine operators to avoid raving of engines.


Air pollution (dust and exhaust emissions)


Sensitization of workers on environmental protection and safety.
Control speed of construction vehicles.
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase on dusty excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of plant and equipment.
Provision of dust masks for use when working in dusty conditions.
Use of serviceable vehicles and machinery to avoid excessive smoke emission.


Bird mortalities


Undertake wire marking to alert birds to the presence of power line Build raptors platforms on top of pylons for roosting and nesting.


Aircraft Navigation Safety


Install visual markers as an indication for light aircraft.
Obtain KCAA approval for tower heights.


Electrocution from Live power lines


Ensuring physical integrity of structures is maintained.
Deactivating and proper grounding of live power distribution lines before work is performed on, or in close proximity to the lines.
Ensuring that live wire work is conducted by trained workers only.
Ensuring the workers are properly isolated and insulated from any conductive object (live line work).


Working at heights during maintenance


Testing of structures for integrity prior to undertaking work.
Implement a fall protection program that includes training in climbing techniques and use of fall protection measures.
Inspection, maintenance and replacement of fall protection equipment
Use of helmets and other protective devices.
Provision of first aid facilities at site.



Fire Risk


Carry out routine thinning, slashing, and other maintenance activities, within and adjacent to Rights-of-Way in order to minimize the risk of fire.
No burning of any materials should be permitted at the site.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Garissa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048021 
National Environment Management Authority.

