
				Page: 1674GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4352
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED REHABILITATION OF KISUMU SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM IN KISUMU CITY, KISUMU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Lake Victoria Environment Management Project II) to support the expansion of the sewerage system and the construction of Artificial Wetland for Kisumu City to improve the final effluent quality that is discharged into River Kisat that finally discharges into Lake Victoria.
The sewerage system for Kisumu City is earmarked for expansion to be able to serve the Western Sewage District of Kisumu City, which is currently un-served but is developing at a high rate. As part f this improvement, Kisat Conventional Sewage treatment plant is set to undergo rehabilitation while Nyalenda Sewage treatment lagoons are already on a progressive rehabilitation.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts 


Proposed Mitigation Measures


Stakeholder preparation Seeking approvals


Involvement of stakeholders and public.
Preparation of management plan.
Acquisition of the project land if necessary.


Establishment of construction camp sites


Undertake ESIA studies for the target camp sites and obtain approval from the relevant authorities (including NEMA).
Isolate through fencing the camp sites from access by the public for their safety.


Access to campsites


Utilize to the extent possible the existing public roads to avoid social and economic disruption.
Ensure road safety measures for the construction vehicles to the extent possible by observing all traffic regulations.


Safety risks
Air pollution
Social nuisance


Provide notices, signage and information to the public for their safety at all locations.
Install barriers along walkways, crossings and public places affected by the works for public safety.
Where there are potential for nuisance from dust generation, ensure earth moving is under dump conditions (consider watering where necessary).
Inform immediate communities or stakeholders of the activities for harmony.
Earth moving to take the shortest period possible.
Sewers channels to be cut in phase and small sections.


Public safety
Occupational safety
 


Notify public the intent to cut sections for safety precautions.
Provide signage and safety information in all work areas.
Ensure compliance by workers with safety safeguards including the OHS, provision of safety gear and enforcement of application.


Disruption of amenities (access roads, services lines and driveways)


Notify other services providers and laying of sewer pipes and testing be undertaken within the shortest period to avoid public disruption.
Mark the lines to avoid conflicts with other activities.


Materials sourcing, delivery and storage
 


Construction material sources should be environmentally sustainable  (approved accordingly).
Delivery routes and modes of transport should be approved.
Material storage on site not to be internal or external nuisance.
Material residuals to be disposed off in accordance with established regulations.


Waste removal and disposal
 


Construction wastes (residual earth, debris and scrap materials) to be removed for safe disposal.
Encourage recycling where possible (concrete debris for access road surfacing).
Contaminated organic matter in the work areas including sludge and grit matter (sewerage plants) to be isolated for safe disposal.


Health and Safety
 
 


Provide construction workers with personal protective gear (gloves, gum boots, overalls and helmets), especially at the wastewater treatment plants.
Provide temporary toilets and bathrooms for the construction workers at the work sites.
Provide onsite first aid kit accessible by the workers on need.
Isolate the site for access by the local communities during the construction for their safety and health.


Air Quality Control
 
 


Control dust emissions in all work areas (watering where necessary).
Sludge to be covered on removal and transit.
Avoid open burning of solid materials during construction works.
Any materials preparation (e.g. crashing) be undertaken in controlled .


Environmental Pollution Control
 


Ensure effluent discharge during construction remains controlled.
Neutralize all solids waste matter (including sludge and grit matter before off-site disposal.


Social interactions
 
 
 


Fence up the site to keep off local communities for their safety (especially children).
Provide safe shed for the workers who may be served food by the local communities.
Ensure any materials released to the local communities for re-use is disinfected.


Sewer connections
 


Provide easy connection points to the treatment plant for the immediate residents for enhanced sense of ownership.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kisumu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/4944730
National Environment Management Authority.

