
				Page: 1660GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4206
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF A BEVERAGE AND DETERGENT PLANT FOR BIDCO OIL REFINERIES LIMITED ON PLOT L.R. NO. THIKA MUNICIPALITY BLOCK 29/370 KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Bidco Oil Refineries Limited) is proposing to construct a Beverage and Detergent Plant  along BAT-Kiganjo road off Thika-Garissa road on Thika Municipality Block 29/370 Kiambu County.
The proposed project will include construction of storage warehouses, boiler house, administration block with parking lot for vehicles and bicycles, transformer room, weighbridge area, security offices at entry points, LPG and diesel storage facility, injection plant, waste storage area and an Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP).
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Proposed Mitigation Measures 


Air pollution
 


Stockpiles of earth should be sprayed with water or cover during dry seasons.
Buffer area of trees and other vegetation will serve as natural windbreaks.
All staff employed at the construction site and visitors must be provided with dust masks.
All raw materials must be sourced as close as possible to the construction site thus reducing the emissions from vehicular traffic.
All waste must be transported off-site for processing, not burnt or stored for any longer than is absolutely necessary.
Machines must not be left idling for unnecessary periods of time.
Perform road repair and construction at times that persons are expected to be at work and school.
Implement a traffic system that involves appropriate signals and signs to ensure the smooth flow of traffic
Noise pollution
Install portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationary equipment where necessary
Put up signs to indicate construction noise generating areas
Maintain all equipment
Workers to be provided with noise safety and protective gear
Silenced machinery and instruments should be employed to reduce the impact of noise on the existing residents and workers.
Equipment such as drills, graders and cement mixers should also be used when the least number of residents can be expected to be affected
Those working with machinery, vehicles and instruments that emit high levels of noise should be provided with ear plugs and ear muffs.
Dust pollution
Spray stock piles of earth with water
Avoid pouring dust materials from elevated areas to ground
Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand and other loose materials
Provide dust screen where necessary
Sensitize workforce including drivers of construction vehicles
Exhaust Emissions
Vehicle idling time shall be minimized
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible
Equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained


Soil erosion


Control earthworks
Install drainage structures properly
Ensure management of excavation activities
Utilize impervious material for areas that require paving.
Accommodate the average number of parking spaces
Ensure that the drainage plan proposed is implemented as stipulated on the plan.
The provision of a system of culverts should be considered.


Water sources


Management of water usage. Avoid unnecessary wastage of water e.g. leaking taps
Avail storage tanks.
Harvesting of rain water
Store all raw materials away from the vicinity of water bodies.
General refuse generated during these phases of the development must be stockpiled in one central area of the development site, away from existing water bodies.
Clearance of vegetation must be avoided in periods of heavy rainfall to reduce the impact of runoff.
Avoid clearance of vegetation when periods of wind speed are highest.
Install siltation traps within the drainage design to collect silt and sediments ensuring that they do not end up in adjacent aquatic areas.
Conduct periodical water quality monitoring to ensure that standards are maintained.
Apply practices and use products that reduce the potential for contamination of ground water and surface water
Ensure that all chemicals are properly stored in a specific location.



Site sanitation


Special attention shall be paid to the sanitary facilities on site
Garbage shall be disposed of periodically


Road safety


Road signs on main roads
Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles
These roads should be sited in such a way that the noise from this movement affects as few of the existing residents as possible.


Public health and occupational safety


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities
Ensure dustbin cubicles are protected from animals, rains and are well covered
Proper handling and disposal of solid waste
Provide suitable safety gear for all personnel
Proper treatment of waste water
Construction activities must therefore be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m


Vegetation


Landscape the site by planting grass and trees at all disturbed areas.
Remove as little vegetation throughout the site as possible. Re-vegetate cleared areas as soon as possible.
Retain vegetation screens to reduce the visual effect of this stage of the development.
Ensure that local building materials and muted colours are used to reduce the visual impacts of the development and the landscaping to hide it or blend in with the local environment.
Maintain all mature trees (trees > 25 cm) within the development;
Incorporate as much local plants found within the area into the final landscaping of the property;
The developer should incorporate trees that are used by bird species for foraging to attract bird species to the area.


Socio economic Impacts


Develop a Corporate Social Responsibility Programme which could provide assistance to the community.
Persons from the nearby communities should be employed to work on the construction site.
Designate the roles and responsibilities of employees, which will enable a clear chain of command in the event of an accident and allows persons to be aware of their responsibilities in the event of such occurrences.
Place a fully equipped first aid kit on the project site.
Ensure that a crew member is trained in basic first aid practices.
Signs must also be placed around the construction site displaying the numbers of the person responsible for handling emergencies on the site
Develop and implement a Health and Safety Training Manual for employees;
Identify a specific area on the project site for vending type activities
Purchase goods and supplies from suppliers within the area.
Developer must improve the road network which provides access to the project area
Ensure that roads are regularly maintained

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048047
National Environment Management Authority.

