
				Page: 872GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1420
THE CAPITAL MARKETS ACT
(Cap. 485A)
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by sections  11 (3) (v) of the Capital Markets Act, the Capital Markets Authority issues the Code of Corporate Governance Practices for Issuers of Securities to the Public, 2015, for application by both listed and unlisted public companies in Kenya.
THE CODE OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE PRACTICES FOR ISSUERS OF SECURITIES TO
THE PUBLIC 2015
PART I: PRELIMINARY
CHAPTER 1
1.1    INTRODUCTION
1.1.1 Citation
This Code may be cited as the Code of Corporate Governance Practices for Issuers of Securities to the Public 2015.
This Code succeeds the Guidelines on Corporate Governance Practices by Public Listed Companies in Kenya, 2002. The Code sets out the principles and specific recommendations on structures and processes, which companies should adopt in making good corporate governance an integral part of their business dealings and culture.
The Code advocates for the adoption of standards that go beyond the minimum prescribed by legislation. The Code has moved away from the “Comply or Explain” approach to “Apply or Explain”. This approach is principle-based rather than rule-based, and recognizes that a satisfactory explanation for any non-compliance will be acceptable in certain circumstances. The approach therefore requires boards to fully disclose any non-compliance with the Code to relevant stakeholders including the Capital Markets Authority with a firm commitment to move towards full compliance. However, the Code contains mandatory provisions which are the minimum standards that issuers must implement, and these are replicated in the Capital Markets (Securities) (Public Offers, Listing and Disclosures) Regulations, 2002. Where Mandatory provisions are imposed by this Code, it is stated that companies shall comply with the particular requirement.
Issuers of restricted offers of securities to sophisticated, institutional or professional investors are exempted from strict compliance with the mandatory provisions and may adopt them as a matter of best practice.
1.1.2  Interpretation
In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires 

