
				Page: 838GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1339
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE JUDICIAL SERVICE ACT
(No. 1 of 2011)
APPOINTMENT
Taskforce on Traditional, Informal and Other Mechanisms Used to Access Justice in Kenya (Alternative Justice Systems)
THE Constitution 2010 provides for the use of alternative forms of dispute resolution mechanisms including traditional dispute resolution mechanisms as long as the traditional dispute resolution mechanisms do not contravene the Bill of Rights or are repugnant to justice or morality. Alternative justice systems must also not be inconsistent with the constitution or any written law.
The dispute resolution processes differ from community to community and vary in scope.
The Judiciary in exercising its constitutional mandate under Article 159 (2) plans to develop a policy to mainstream Alternative Justice System (AJS) with a view to enhancing access to and expeditious delivery of Justice as espoused at Pillar one of the Judiciary Transformation Framework which is the blue print for transformation in the judiciary. The programme will provide court-annexed cultural alternatives to mainstream justice processes in appropriate circumstances. 
Recognizing that dispute resolution processes differ from community to community and vary in scope, the Judiciary has established a multi stakeholder task force to formulate an appropriate judicial policy on Alternative Justice Systems and to consider the methodology and viability of mainstreaming Alternative Justice Systems; and to suggest concrete ways of doing so.
To this extent, the Chief Justice, in exercise of his powers conferred by section 5 (2) (c) of the Judicial Service Act appoints the following members to the Taskforce—
Hon. Justice Joel Ngugi (Prof.), Judiciary/JTI—(Chairperson)
Hon. Justice Joseph Sergon, Judiciary
Hon. Clara Otieno-Omondi, Judiciary/JTI
Hon. Florence Macharia, Judiciary
Hon. Peter Mulwa, Judiciary/RMC
Hon. Joan Irura, Judiciary
Masha Baraza (Dr.), Judiciary/ODCJ
Steve Ouma Akoth (Dr.), Pamoja Trust—(Vice-Chairperson)
Katto Wambua, ODPP
Tom Chavangi, National Land Commission
Sheikh Ahmed Set, National Council of Elders
Comm. Jedidah Wakonyo, KNHR
James Aggrey Adoli, Director, Community Policing
Morris Kimuli, LSK
Linet Njeri (Ms.), Strathmore Law School
Anita Nyanjong (Ms.), ICJ-Kenya
A representative from FIDA-Kenya
A representative from Legal Resources Foundation (LRF)
Maina S. N. Njema
This APPOINTMENT is for an initial period that ends on 30th September, 2016.
The Terms of Reference of the Taskforce are as follows:
(a) Convene stakeholders and practitioners in Alternative Justice System in order to map out and understand the prevalence of use of Alternative Justice System, its intersection with the Judicial System and the progress made in infusing it with national and constitutional values;
(b) Undertake a situational analysis of any existing reports, manuals, guidelines, practice notes, legal provisions on mainstreaming Alternative Justice System;
(c)  In conjunction with the Judiciary Training Institute to pilot and bench-mark existing models of Court-Annexed Alternative Justice System, to capacitate them, observing them and document their functioning to glean best practices to be used to develop potential national model;
(d) Work with any seconded Consultants to synthesize secondary and primary data collected to address the objectives of the policy formulation exercise;
(e)  Consolidate best practices from selected traditional justice systems of selected communities;
(f)   Highlight challenges and effects of inter-linkage between traditional justice systems and the formal justice system;
(g) Consult with key stakeholders and recommend a linkage between traditional and informal Justice Systems and the formal justice systems;
(h) Study best practices, formulate the policy on mainstreaming alternative techniques for reducing case backlog and produce a draft;
(i)   Develop a  strategic plan to implement the policy;
(j)   Present the draft documents to key stakeholders within the justice sector through meetings and workshops and incorporate comments as necessary; and
(k)  Develop a National Model for Court-annexed traditional justice resolution mechanism for possible adoption.
JTI will provide secretariat services to the Taskforce.  The Taskforce is expected to deliver an initial report in June, 2016.
Dated the 29th February, 2016.
WILLY MUTUNGA
Chief Justice/President, Supreme Court of Kenya.

