
				Page: 2055GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6179
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MINI CEMENT GRINDING PLANT, WITHIN ENGASHURA AREA IN NAKURU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Karsan Ramji and Sons Limited, is proposing to construct a Mini Cement Grinding Plant, Within Engashura Area in Nakuru County.
The Project involves, two processes involved in cement grinding i.e. the dry process and the wet process. In the case of this proposal, the dry process technology will be used. From storage, the clinker will be transferred by heavy duty wheel loaders into an impact conveyer belt via an intake hopper and dropped into a conveyer belt and transported to its hopper. The hopper will be installed with an overflow-belt to transport excess clinker back to the clinker hall.
The plant seeks to produce ordinary Portland cement (CEM I 42.5N) which is manufactured by intimately inter-grinding 90%wt/total wt clinker, 3.5%wt/total wt pozzolona and 6.5% wt/total wt gypsum.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible impact 


Proposed mitigation measures 


Vegetation Clearance


Grass and vegetative material resulting from clearance activities should be disposed off through compositing and the hardy wood from acacia sold to hotel establishments as wood fuel.
Areas of exposed soil should be replanted with grass, as soon as possible, after site preparation and construction to help mitigate against flash flooding and soil erosion.
Adequate temporary drainage channels should be constructed to help facilitate the outflow of onsite runoff.


Management of changes in drainage
 


Storm water should be controlled (channeled or put into under-ground pipes), before it enters the site, to ensure that the processing plant is not jeopardized during heavy rains.
An oil-water separator with a sedimentation bay should be incorporated in the pavement of the proposed site (where the drains all congregate).
A detention basin should be incorporated in the design to eliminate the impact of the increased run-off area.


Minimization of noise and vibration


Use equipment indicated, by the various manufacturers/suppliers, as having low noise emissions.
Use equipment that is properly fitted with noise reduction devices (i.e. mufflers, etc).
Restrict the operation and use of noise-generating equipment to regular working hours (daytime only), reducing the potential of creating a noise nuisance during the night.
Supply construction workers operating noisy equipment with appropriate personal noise protection gear (e.g. ear muffs, ear plugs, etc.).


Management of air pollution


Particularly in un-grassed, exposed areas the construction site should be dampened prevent a dust nuisance. On hotter days, this frequency should be increased.
Re-vegetation of exposed, cleared, areas to be done as soon as possible to further militate against the effects of dust generation.
Stored construction materials (e.g. top soil, marl), should be covered or wetted (to prevent a dust nuisance).
Construction workers working in dusty areas should be provided and fitted with respirators.


Solid waste generation


Bins should be strategically placed within the campsite and construction site and adequately designed & covered to prevent odour, a dust nuisance and access by vermin.
The bins at both the construction campsite and construction site, should be emptied regularly to prevent overfilling.
Disposal of the contents of the bins should be done at an approved disposal site and by a NEMA licensed waste contractor.
The proponent and the contractor should comply with the requirements of the Waste Management Regulations (Legal Notice No. 61 of 2009) in the collection, conveyance and disposal of wastes from the plant.


Management of impacts on traffic flow


Adequate and appropriate road signs should be erected to warn road users of the construction activities. The proponent should provide deceleration and acceleration lanes to and from the project site respectively. This should be done in conjunction with the Kenya National Highways Authority.
Raw materials, such as marl, sand and top soil, should be adequately covered within the trucks (to prevent any escaping into the air or onto the roadway).
The transport and movement of equipment (trucks) should be limited to working hours only.
Heavy equipment should be transported during early morning with appropriate pilotage.
The use of flagmen should be employed to regulate trucks entering and exiting the access roads to the highway.


Management of sewage


The workforce will use existing sanitary facilities available at the quarry site.


Management of health and safety risks of workers and visitors


The contractor will provide workers with appropriate Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) and ensure their use.
Workers to be trained on equipment use.
First aid facilities to be available on site.
The contractor should provide standby vehicle to handle emergencies.
Contractor to comply with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) by registering the site as a work place.
All visitors to the site to be provided with PPE.
Make prior arrangements with health care facilities to accommodate any eventualities.


Management of possible fire outbreaks


The best strategy for fire management is to prevent it from occurring in the first place.
Fire extinguishers should be provided and personnel trained on their use.
A fire assembly point should be provided.


Mitigating Elevated energy demands


The issue with respect to mitigation will be the optimization of the process to ensure efficient use of energy.
Over grinding uses excess energy, so it is important to ensure the maintenance of an optimal particle size distribution (during the production process). Particle size controls the final strength of the cement and so needs careful monitoring at the time of manufacture.


Management of dust generation


Cover trucks during transportation.
Store raw materials in secured areas or sealed silos.
Cover the conveyor belt system.
Install dust collectors at mixing, grinding and bagging unit operations.
Implement an effective housekeeping programme.
Implement monitoring programme by a NEMA designated laboratory.


Management of heat generation


Proper ventilation of the area.
Protection of the worker.
Monitor the time spent by workers in areas with elevated temperatures to ensure that they are not exceeding the prescribed work times based on the clothing being worn and the physical fitness of the person.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nakuru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project. A copy of Environmental Assessment report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke and comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/8053293 National Environment Management Authority.

