
				Page: 2058GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6589
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PHASE 3 EXPANSION OF THE SARIT CENTRE SHOPPING MALL, AT WESTLANDS IN NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Soma Properties Limited, is proposing phase three (3) expansion of the Sarit  Mall, at Westland’s in Nairobi County. Theproposed project comprises the following:  250,000 ft2 of additional retail space to satisfy the increased demand for business activities;  a multi-storey car parking silo to create more parking space while occupying minimal land acreage, and  an expanded exhibition hall for local and international events. Actual components of the proposed project are: A silo-parking,  lower ground floor which will house a new supermarket, ground and first floors which will consist of retail space,  second floor which will consist of an exhibition hall, food and beverage and entertainment facilities,  a new boundary wall to match the existing one , A new electrical utility room , a service yard, development utilities (water, sewer line, drainage, clean energy) etc.  Additional amenities for the project will include:  Fire escape staircases and foot paths, ticketing and facility area, disabled access provisions to all areas of the mall as well as dedicated parking spaces
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Environmental Impacts 


Suggested Mitigation Measures 


Air pollution and dust generation
 


Spray of water during construction work.
Control of speed and movements of construction vehicles.
Building a buffer fence around the construction site.
Use of low-sulphur diesel for diesel-operated construction machinery.


Noise pollution
 


No unnecessary hooting by project and building occupants vehicles.
Use of ear muffs by construction workers.
Use of attenuated equipment.
Temporarily fencing off noisy machinery such as vibrators.
Provide separate access for deliveries and tenants/shoppers.


Traffic management
 


Develop a traffic plan to minimize traffic flow and ensure smooth operation of construction activities e.g. delivery of construction materials to be done during off-peak hours.
Choice of access routes during construction phase should ensure minimum disturbance to the neighbours and other road users.
Ensure proper storage of materials to avoid obstruction of the adjacent roads and public foot paths.
Put adequate signage at the construction site e.g. Entry, Exit', Caution this is a construction Site, “Men at Work” etc.
Set driving speed limits and erection of speed bumps.
Provide adequate and well planned parking spaces at the shopping mall.


Generation of solid waste
 


Re-use of soil for landscaping.
Re-use of construction debris as basement for parking yard.
Proper containment and disposal of solid waste.
Contracting a licensed waste collection and disposal company at operation stage.
Use of soil and construction debris for rehabilitation of quarry pits.
Sensitizing construction workers and building occupants on proper waste disposal and material re-use.
Reuse of timber off-cuts and wooden supports for fuel.


Health and safety
 


Construction workers to be provided with appropriate personal protective equipment.
Site to be sprinkled with water to minimize dust.
Use of stable ladders and other climbing/support structures.
Sensitize workers on construction safety measures.
Cleanliness and organization at the construction site.
Fencing or covering of risky areas such as deep pits.
Safety signage.
Use of permit-to-work authorizer for risky jobs.
Engagement of skilled labourers.
Insurance of workers.


Fire hazards and accidents
 


Acquire fire fighting facilities.
Sensitize workers on fire safety.
Proper disposal of solid waste.
No storage of inflammables at site.
Keep well stocked first aid box.
Proper handling and use of tools and machinery.
Use of correct PPE.


Security
 


Ensure that the site is always guarded by a reputable security firm.
Constant site patrol.
Adequate screening of visitors to the site.
Collaboration with existing security machinery.
Partnership with neighbours and police in community policing.


Public health and safety
 


Proper handling and disposal of solid waste.
Control of visitors to the site.
Safe and comprehensive decommissioning of connections and structures thereof at decommissioning phase.
Traffic control.
Installation of adequate water supply.
Enhanced site security.



Decommissioning (demolition waste)
 


Use of an integrated solid waste management system.
Where recycling /reuse of the machinery equipment, partitions and other demolition waste is not possible, the material should be taken to a licensed waste disposal.
Implement an appropriate re-vegetation landscaping programme to restore the site to its original status. Consider planting of indigenous species when restoring the site to its original status.


Accident prevention
 


Safe handling of tools and machinery.
Use of appropriate personal protection equipment.
Engagement of qualified personnel.
Controlling visitor entry into the site.


Tools and machinery safety


Use of tools and machines for designated job.
Regular servicing of machinery.
Proper storage of tools.


Emergency preparedness


Keeping passages clear.
Marking emergency exits.
Training staff on emergency preparedness and response.
Keeping a well-equipped first aid kit on site.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/8055191 National Environment Management Authority.

