
				Page: 2057GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6355
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED BIOGAS POWER PLANT ON L.R. NO. 2780 AT CHWOWE BEACH (LAKE VICTORIA), KOBALA IN HOMA BAY COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Thika Way Investments Limited, is proposing a Biogas Power Plant at Chwowe Beach (Lake Victoria), within Kobala in HomaBay County, The Project involves, the construction of a biogas power  plant, consisting of twelve fermenters, feedstock silos, residuals impounding  basins, combined  heat and power system (CHP combustion engine) Shipping docks for water hyacinth supply, fertilizer processing  facilities as well as of a technical equipment building and a main operations  building with humanitarian installations and sanitation. The technology used in  the design and construction the biogas plant will be  based  on international standards, which have been customized by  various  Biogas Plants in the world that are designed by EnviTecBiogas AG. Capacity size of the proposed biogas power plant is 35 MW in total, Due  to infrastructural challenges of adequate feedstock supply, project shall be divided into several batches of 8 MW capacity each an one 3 MW batch. The nature  ofplant  operation will apply in the same manner to all facilities  installed. The total energy yield  tobe produced  by the 35 MW installed capacity is computed  to be 307,000 MWhper  year which will be  fed into the National grid.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental/Social Impact 


Mitigation measures 


Loss of biodiversity


Maintain a riparian buffer zone.
Clearance of vegetation should be done  in necessary areas only.
Carry out environmental compensation where harm cannot be avoided by planting of indigenous plants.


Air pollution


Spray water on exposed areas during dry  weather  to suppress dust.
Cover loads of friable materials during  transportation.
Stock piles to be covered with tarpaulins.
Control speed of construction vehicles and switch off machines  when not in use.
Regularly service and maintain vehicles and mobile plants  and machiner.
Provide PPE e.g. nose masks to workers.
Hydrogen sulfide emissions to be controlled by feeding  small amounts of oxygen into the fermente.
Emission/odors to be controlled  by covered silo containers.
Continuous regulations ofgasproduction in the Digester to ensure  constant and effective operating conditions.
Regulation of biogas production to ensure minimum flaring and venting of biogas.
Cover the reception bunker immediately after feeding.
The cover of the silage cut surface to be  closed  immediately after removing.


Soil degradation


Excavated soil to be used for backfilling\cover stockpiles with tarpaulins.
Use of gravel bags and silt traps to prevent soil loss especially during rains.
As much as possible, construction to be conducted in dry seasons to prevent soil erosion/degradation.
Landscaping (e.g. planting, trees, grasses) after construction.
Top soil to be used for landscaping.


Effluent management


Provision of portable toilets for the workers.
Contaminated waste water to be channelled into a conservancy tank.
Properly designed sewerage  system.
Routine  check-ups and monitoring of the drainage  systems to avoid leakages  and blockages.
Separate storm water and water drains.
Contaminated surface water to  drain into an oil/water interceptor.
Drainage and  interceptor to be skimmed every fortnight and desludged biannually.


Increase in solid wastes


Limited quantity  by  developing appropriate budgets  for purchase of raw materials to reduce wastage through exposure to weather elements.
Provision of a waste transfer station within the  development.
Segregation of waste at source through provision of separate  bins.
Contract a duly licensed waste handler to transport waste.


River and lake degradation


No development activity to be undertaken within the full width of the river or within the riparian reserve as per Water Quality Regulations, 2006.
Proper storage of harvested water hyacinth to avoid spread of the weed into other water bodies.
Regular servicing and maintenance of the mowing boats to avoid oil spills into the Lake.
The boats’ fuel tanks and oil reserves will be double-cased to prevent Leaking or interaction with the water body at any time.


Excess noise and vibrations


Workers working with machinery, vehicles and instruments that emit high levels of noise should be provided with ear muffs.
Proper servicing of machinery and equipment (oiling, greasing etc.)
Installation of portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationary equipment where necessary.
Monitor noise levels as per NEMA guidelines.
All machinery shall be placed within the sound proof technical equipment building.


Shoreline erosion


Manual harvest of the water hyacinth along the shoreline using assigned fisher boats so as not to destroy any plants or animal habits.


Pressure on transport infrastructure


The proponent to reconstruct the bridge across river Sondu Miriu for appropriate access of land from public road rehabilitated by Homa Bay County for transportation and general land area access.
Speed limits and all other road signs and traffic rules to be strictly observed.


HIV/Aids


Erection of billboards to sensitize locals on the need to practice safe sex to help in the fight against HIV/Aids.
Conduct awareness campaigns on HIV/Aids among the workers and the locals. This can be undertaken through the various NGOs and government agencies in the project area.


Security


Site fencing, security installations and deploying security personnel.
All Risk Insurance to cover costs of plant damages (or any delays producing costs) caused by third parties or natural occurrences.


Vegetation disturbance land deformation: Soil erosion, drainage problems


Implement an appropriate re-vegetation programme to restore the site to its original status.
During the re-vegetation period, appropriate surface water runoff controls will be taken to prevent surface erosion.
Monitoring and inspection of the area for indications of erosion will be conducted and appropriate measures taken to correct any occurrences
Fencing and signs restricting access will be posted to minimize disturbance to newly-vegetated areas.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Homa Bay County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/8055191 National Environment Management Authority.

