
				Page: 3244Gazette Notice No. 8692
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
 (No.17 of  2012)
NYERI COUNTY GOVERNMENT
Appointment of Task Force for County Referral Hospital and Health Service Delivery Nyeri County
IT IS notified for public information that the County Executive Secretary for Health Services, Nyeri County, has appointed a Task Force with the following terms of reference—
Terms of reference for health taskforce are to—
Identify the most appropriate structure for leadership and governance suitable for the County Referral Hospital and other County Health facilities.
Examine ways and means of improving health service delivery in the County Referral Hospital and other County Health Facilities.
Identify ways of improving on the health infrastructure- both physical and equipment- to match a County Referral Hospital’s status.
Address the human resources issues namely, gap, training needs, retention, staff development and all other aspects of capacity building.
Identify ways of improving and benefiting from partnerships with medical training institutions and universities and also enhance research.
Recommend on all the above and all other ways and means to enhance quality, timely, affordable, accessible, equitable health service delivery.
Note
The mandate of this task force is expanded to cover the four level IV hospitals on the same terms of reference and namely:
Karatina Sub County Hospital.
Mukurwe-ini Sub County Hospital.
Othaya Sub County Hospital.
Mt. Kenya Sub County Hospital.
The members of the Task Force shall be as follows—
Titus Kahiga (Dr.)—(Chairperson).
Alice N. Waweru (Ms.)—(Vice-Chairperson).
Members:
Gichuyia N. M’Riara (Dr.).
Patrick Wachira.
Muringo Kimamo (Ms.).
Justice I.E.K. Mukinya (Rtd.).
Julius K. Macharia (Dr.).
Gladys W. Mwangi (Dr.).
Damaris Gitonga (Ms.).
L.P. Mureithi (Prof.).
Richard G. Wahiu (Dr.).
Stephen Omondi Odindo.
Jacob Nyang’au Onkunga.
Duration of Assignment:
The Task Force shall, subject to any extension that the Governor may authorize, execute its mandate and submit its report to the Governor and County Executive Secretary for Health Services, not later than two (2) months from the date of its commissioning.
Subject to the foregoing paragraph, the Task Force may, if it deems it expedient to do so, submit to the Governor and County Executive Secretary for Health Services interim reports proposing measures for immediate implementation before its final report.
The Secretarial Support:
The Secretarial support to the Task Force shall be provided by the office of the county health department and that office shall provide the necessary facilitation of the process to ensure effective and timely delivery by the Task Force on its mandate.
CHARLES GITHUA GITHINJI,
MR/6254688 Executive Secretary for Health Services, Nyeri County.

