
				Page: 3262Gazette Notice No. 8788
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED GULF ENERGY SOUTHERN BYPASS PETROL SERVICE STATION ON L.R. NO. 9306 OFF THE SOUTHERN BYPASS, FRONTING THE UNIVERSITY OF NAIROBI RESEARCH SITE LANDIN NAIROBI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Gulf Energy Limited) is proposing to construct a service station off the Southern Bypass, adjacent to the University of Nairobi research site and geomagnetic research station in Nairobi County, on a parcel of land L. R. No. 9306.
The proposed project shall comprise of the following facilities parking bay, staff and public toilets, offices, Pump islands (four pumps dispensing both diesel and super), three Underground Storage Tanks (USTs) and a Service house with lube bay, tyre change bay and the open washing bays .
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Security measures


Provision of security at all the times by security guides.
Ensure adequate lighting within and around the premises.
Regular checks and maintenance of security lights.


Air and noise pollution
 


Workers shall be trained on management of air pollution from vehicles and machinery. All construction machinery shall be maintained and serviced in accordance with the contractor’s specifications.
Vehicles delivering soil materials shall be covered to reduce spills and windblown dust.
All construction machinery are maintained and serviced in accordance with the contractor’s specifications.
Dust generating activities (excavation, handling and transport of soils) are not carried out during times of strong winds.
Water is applied whenever dust emissions are visible at the site in the opinion of the opinion of the Supervising Engineer.


Loss of vegetation


Design and landscaping for flower beds.
Preparation of the flower and ornamental tree beds.
Planting of appropriate flowers and trees.
Employ a flower gardener to keep and maintain the flowers and trees.


Water and soil contamination


Safety and emergency response plan to be developed for all operations with emphasis on the protection of the environment prior to start up by the contractor.
No grey water runoff or uncontrolled discharges from the site/working areas (including wash down areas) shall be permitted.
Water containing pollutants such as cements, concrete, lime, chemicals and fuels shall be discharged into a sewer line for removal from site.
Potential pollutants of any kind and in any form shall be kept, stored and used in such a manner that any escape can be contained and the water table not endangered.
Wash areas shall be placed and constructed in such a manner so as to ensure that the surrounding areas (including groundwater) are not polluted.
The Contractor shall take reasonable measures to control storm water and the erosive effects.
No construction materials shall be stockpiled within areas that are at risk of flooding.
Plastic sheeting, sandbags or geofabric approved by the Supervising Engineer shall be used to prevent the migration of fines.


Occupational health and safety


Develop a site safety action plan detailing safety equipment to be used, emergency procedures, restrictions on site, frequency and personnel responsible for safety inspections and controls.
All workmen should be provided with personal protective equipment.
The Conditions of Contract in the tender documents should stipulate health, safety and environment regulations and work procedures.
The Contractor must appoint a foreman with knowledge on health, safety and environment regulations.
All injuries that occur on site must be recorded in the accident registers and corrective actions for their prevention be instigated as appropriate (Sections  of the OSH Act).
Site personnel should be encouraged to report “near-miss incidents” in order to avoid potential problems and increase safety awareness.
Statistical records on accidents and incidents should be analyzed on a monthly basis and forwarded to the Supervising Consultant, DOSHS offices and / or displayed on the notice boards.


Erosion Control


Earthworks should be controlled so that land that is not required for the construction works is not disturbed. Wherever possible, earthworks should be carried out during the dry season to prevent soil from being washed away by the rain.
Excavated materials and excess earth will be kept at appropriate sites approved by the supervising engineer and the earth dumping sites designed in such a manner as to facilitate natural water discharge.
The Contractor shall protect areas susceptible to erosion by installing necessary temporary and permanent drainage works as soon as possible.


Fire and safety:


Place portable fire extinguishers at suitable locations, according to the activities in the construction programme.
Mark and sign-post all emergency exits;
Ensure safety warnings are prominently displayed on site, such as “No smoking”, “No naked flames”.
Provide and enforce the use of personal protective equipment (PPE).
Install a temporary fire alarm and ensure that fire procedures are known to all the site staff.
Ensure that an adequately stocked First Aid box is on site at all times.
Maintain an incident/accident register, in accordance with the OSHA, 2007.


Waste management


Comply with the requirements of the EMCA (Waste Management) Regulations, 2006.
Develop a solid waste management plan prior to project commencing, identifying optimal waste re-use options and disposal areas.
Waste should not be burned on site or dumped in undesignated waste disposal areas.
Minimise waste production by utilizing best available techniques for site preparation.
Clearly designate and construct an appropriate waste collection facility or provide covered refuse skips.
Re-use construction waste to the maximum extent possible.
Proper handling and storage procedures for hazardous wastes e.g. fuel oil should be stored in areas with hard standing and containment to handle spills.


Waste water and waste oil management practices


Carefully collect used oil in drums and dispose of by licensed refuse contractor.
Adhere to Wastewater management regulation of the legal Notice 121 and Water quality regulations of the Legal Notice 120.
Conduct wastewater monitoring to check compliance on monthly basis and submit the results to NEMA County Office for immediate approval of the station operations.
Document and train staff in the emergency spill response plan.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5951918         National Environment Management Authority.


