
				Page: 3258Gazette Notice No. 8786
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED 2ND RUNWAY PROJECT WITH ASSOCIATED FACILITIES AT JOMO KENYATTA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT IN NAIROBI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Airports Authority) is proposing to construct a 2nd runway and associated facilities at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA).
The 2nd runway will comprise a pavement 45m wide and 5.5km long with shoulders, drainage and taxiways. Specific components will comprise the following; eight (8) number right angle exit taxiways, fire rescue installations, appropriate instrumentation, lighting and signage, drainage systems and three (3) pairs of connecting taxiways between the 2nd runways
Below is a summary of the anticipated impacts and the proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Proposed Mitigation Measures


Waste (liquid and solid) management


The contractor will be expected to develop a comprehensive waste management plan for the construction period guided by the ESMP. This will be part of a mandatory Contractors Environmental Management Plan,
Construction work areas and the campsites shall be provided with appropriate solid waste bins and removal mechanisms defined at all times.
The intention to apply all spoil earth excavated from the airport improvement works to create an embankment (already taking place during this study) along the Syokimau boundary line for noise buffering is highly appreciated.
Inert solid waste materials (scrap metals, plastic, polythene materials, timber, etc.) will be made available for recycling onsite or offsite as a sustainable disposal option (these will be guided by the 3R principle).
All liquid wastes shall be contained such as not flow into open drainage systems within and downstream of the work areas.
During operations, comply with provisions of the JKIA Waste Management Plan through integration of the new components (Terminal 4, new car parking block, drainage systems and support services areas).
All operators should comply with the Waste Management Regulations under the Environment and Management and Co-ordination Act, 1999.
Need to ensure all point sources of wastewater are connected to the sewer system. No wastewater should link into the open drainage systems.
Employ the use of licensed waste handlers to regularly collect and carry away wastes generated.


Storm water management


Ponding at the construction areas will be avoided at all times during the works by ensuring channelized surface runoff from the construction activities, rainfall or from other airport activities.
Consider integrating the 2nd runway and associated taxiways into the overall Drainage Management Plan for the entire airport and the physical master plan.
Maintain the drains clear throughout the airport grounds to prevent localized ponding as well as minimise possible pollutant transportation from point sources.
All drains from established point sources of pollution should be installed with appropriate oil/green interceptors and grit traps for safety of the downstream aquatic systems.


Air quality


Minimize dust emissions through sprinkling of water along transport routes and on stone-crushing plants.
Ensure the trucks hauling the materials are covered to reduce on wind blowing off the materials.
Ensure the machinery used in construction and trucks are well serviced and maintained and operated within the applicable levels.
Adequate provision of personal protective equipment for the construction workers.
Ensure frequent air quality monitoring during the construction phase.
Limit speed of trucks especially on earth roads.
Develop emission inventory of the construction activities to benchmark emissions against legal requirements, and to establish mitigation programme baseline.
Operators around the airport will be required to comply with established international environmental safeguards on air quality.
The concept of the taxiway lighting is adopting the LED technology and applying reflective mirrors’ principles using strategic light emitters along the pavement length.
Develop emission inventory of the airport to include collecting information on emissions while monitoring trends and assessing future scenarios, benchmarking emissions against legal requirements, and creating input data for dispersion models in an effort to determine pollution concentration. Methodology to include regulatory, technical, operational and economic measures.
All vehicles and related equipment used in the airside to be well-maintained and related records kept available for audit.
Aircraft fuelling to be done according to the latest international manuals on aircraft refuelling.
Optimize ground service infrastructure to reduce aircraft and ground vehicle movement on taxiway and idling at the gate.
In fire-fighting drills, select cleaner fuels such as LPG and avoid the use of waste oil or jet fuel where possible.
All airlines will be encouraged on the adoption of low emission aircrafts to the extent possible, especially where fuel consumption is reduced.


Noise and vibration


Ensure that machines, plants and equipment to be used meet noise and vibration requirements.
Ensure all heavy plants, machinery and equipment are appropriately muffled and well insulated against excessive noise.
Limit working hours for operations likely to be noisy to day time only.
Rotate workers so as to minimize impacts of prolonged exposures of noise and / or excessive vibrations to health.
Install noise barriers especially for noise-sensitive areas bordering construction sites.
Provide personal protective equipment for staffs in noisy/vibration prone areas /tools/equipment and enforce application.
Enhanced observation of occupational health and safety precautions including application of earmuffs and ear corks by the workers.
As the ATMs increase, KCAA would be expected to consider adopting a flight mix distribution strategy as opposed to a single flight corridor.
Initiate a public awareness and sensitisation on appropriate adaptation to elevated noise levels associated with aircraft operations including design and construction of residential, institutional and commercial buildings as well as influencing sustainable land use planning.
Inventory noise sources and work out best solution for the reduction of adverse effects.
Apply engineering controls, (noise attenuators, use double plane windows with air space between them, cover walls with acoustic tiles).
Institute management controls (e.g. rotate workers to maintain low effective noise exposure, Schedule work-shifts to split between airport peak hours and sensitize workers on noise hazards).


Ecological settings


Work in partnership with Kenya Wildlife Service on wildlife intruding into the airport grounds that migrate from the Donyo Sabuk Game Reserve and the Ranches in Machakos. Part of this initiative may include;
ü Fence off the entire eastern edge of the airport grounds with appropriate fence to keep off the migrating wildlife.
ü Once the fence is in place, engage KWS on relocating the closed in wildlife species safely to either NNP or Donyo Sabuk Game Reserve.
No polluting materials will be discharge into the open drains and the downstream aquatic systems from sources.


Occupational Health and Safety  (OHS)
 


Provide for appropriate site/job/safety training by the Contractor and KAA.
Provide adequate supervision of workers.
Provide adequate sanitary facilities and clean drinking water for workers.
Ensure provision of appropriate PPE’s for adverse weather e.g. Raincoats, dust masks and gum boots.
Employer to provide occupational examination to particular categories of employees as indicated in the Second Schedule to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 2007.
Sensitize and create awareness to all construction workers regarding health precautions.
Provide staff medical cover for all construction workers.
Provide first aid facilities and personnel, with contacts to hospitals and emergency services.
Provide fire fighting equipment and train fire marshals.
Contractor(s) to constitute a safety and health committee and facilitate them to carry out their mandate as provided in the Occupational Safety and Health (Safety Committees) Rules, 2004.
Ensure appropriate signage and information for all work areas with potential safety risks, Appropriate barricades, flashers, markers, temporary directional or informational signs shall be installed as directed.


Socio Impacts


Assurance to the neighbouring communities that the development of the 2nd Runway will have no physical effects or linkages to their welfare.
Enhance safety and security screening at the entry points, especially into the airfield.
Contractors shall ensure observance of safety precautions at all times.
All Contractors shall enhance awareness on HIV/AIDS and other social infections to the workers and the airport community in general.
The Contractor(s) to ground the truck drivers on safety precautions especially while traversing through the residential areas. Such precautions will include speed control for lower dust generation and safety.
The works will not interfere with the surface drainage of the neighbouring areas.
Material delivery trucks shall be well maintained for low noise while traversing the residential areas.
It is noted that there are other projects (other than KAA) that use the same materials sources and access roads. The Contractor(s) may identify specific routes for ease of monitoring of specific impacts from their own trucks.
Implementation of the KAA - CSR Strategy in support of socio issues such as environment, education, health, sport, sanitation, hygiene, etc.
Identify with the social groups activities and their values for enhanced community participation on JKIA interests including safety and security.


Wakes and vortices


Air traffic controllers to provide Vortex Avoidance Procedures.
Application of standard separation (ICAO recommended separation minima) for landing / tale-off.
Pilots to apply appropriate recommended spacing during arrivals.
Flight crew to maintain situational awareness by monitoring other traffic in the vicinity and using Traffic Collision Avoidance Systems (TCAS).
All flight plans to be scheduled according to ICAO Doc 4443 and other internal procedures developed by JKIA Aerodromes.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
KODIA BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/6254610         National Environment Management Authority.


