
				Page: 257GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  686
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF MODERN MIXED USE COMMERCIAL OFFICE/HOTEL COMPLEX ON L.R. NO. 209/64/11 MUTHITHI ROAD-WESTLANDS, NAIROBI CITY COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Westlands Skye Development Limited has proposed a state of the art premium offices and an internationally styled business hotel housed in an 18 storied office block consisting of two towers-wing A and B. The building will have at least three (3) basements that will serve as the parking area for tenant cars having a total of 40 vehicle parking spaces each. The building will also be serviced with four (4) lifts, have fibre cable serving all the floors. The project is located on plot No L.R. No. 209/64/11 on Muthithi Road, Westlands, Nairobi City County.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Likely Impact 


Mitigation Measures


Loss of flora and faunal habitats


Landscaping with indigenous species on completion of construction.
Maintaining of landscaped gardens, terraces, conservation and management of the vegetation and gardens.
Clearing vegetation only in construction areas and demarcating areas where no clearing will happen.


Changes in surface and sub-surface hydrology


During construction, the design (of the drainage system) should ensure that surface flow is drained suitably into the public drains provided to control flooding within the site.
Drainage channels should be installed in all areas that generate or receive surface water such as car parking, driveways and along the building block-edges of the roofs.
The channels should be covered with gratings or other suitable and approved materials to prevent occurrence of accidents and entry dirt that would compromise flow of run-off.
The channels should be designed with regards to the peak volumes such as periods or seasons when there is high intensity of rainfall which is also not common in the project area but just in case such an event occurs. They should never at any time be full due to the resulting heavy downpours.
The drainage channels should ensure the safe final disposal of run-off /surface water and should be self-cleaning which means it should have a suitable gradient.
Storm water generated from roof catchments should be harvested, stored and made use in various household activities such as general cleaning. This will reduce run-off reaching the drainage channels.
Paving of the side walkways, driveways and other open areas should be done using pervious materials such as cabro to encourage water recharge and reduce run-off volume.



Changes in soil characteristics


Sprinkling water on the soil to prevent dust from rising.
Creating specific paths for the trucks.
Ensuring there is enough space for normal percolation of water.
Preventing pollution from construction wastes by having specific sites for collection, sorting and transport of wastes.
Proper installation and configuration of drainage structures to ensure their efficiency.
Installing cascades to break the impact of water flowing into the drains.
Controlling the earthworks and ensuring the management of excavation activities.
Compacting areas with loose soil.
Landscaping.
Providing soil erosion control structures on the steeper areas of the site & controlling activities during the rainy season.


Emissions of air pollutants


Sprinkling water on soil before excavation and periodically when operations are under way to prevent raising of dusts.
Enclosing the structures under construction with dust proof nets.
Using efficient machines with low emission technologies for the ones that burn fossil fuels.
Controlling the speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Regular maintenance and services of machines and engines.
Use of clean fuels e.g. unleaded and de-sulphurized fuels.
Educate and raise awareness of construction workers on emission reduction techniques.
Install scrubbers in the exhausts of  motor vehicles to filter the toxic fumes
Use of clean fuels such as solar and wind energy sources.
Use of de -sulphurized and unleaded fuels in vehicles.
Banning the burning of wastes and other materials at the site.
Using efficient equipment, machines and engines that emit less pollutants.


Increased pressure on utilities
 


Employing water conservation techniques and only using the required amounts of water to prevent wastage.
Employing power saving techniques such as switching off equipment when not in use, using natural light whenever possible.
Using machines with power saving technologies i.e. high efficiency equipment.
Providing proper sanitary facilities for construction workers.
Inspecting the drainage facilities regularly to ensure they are free of debris that may reduce their efficiency.


Sociocultural impacts


Integrating Equal Opportunity Principles in Procurement and human resource policies.
Promoting social cohesion and integration among people in the area.
Creating awareness towards the diversity of cultures and different economic background of the people in the project staff and residents through sensitization.
Allowing the residents and businesses to form social groups and networks that build social capital.
Targeting social investment programs towards the local communities and region.


Increased traffic


Placing signs around the site notifying other vehicles about the heavy traffic and to set the speed limit around the site.
Ensuring all drivers for the project comply to speed regulations.
Making sure the construction doesn’t occupy the road reserves and complying to traffic and land demarcation obligations.
Ensuring all vehicles used for the project are in good working condition both legally and commensurate to their intended use.
Ensuring all drivers for the project comply to traffic regulations
Making sure the construction doesn’t occupy the road reserves and complying to traffic and land demarcation obligations.
Ensuring all vehicles used for the project are in good working condition both legally and commensurate to their intended use.


Generation of waste


Developing and implementing a waste management plan.
Following EMCA regulations on Waste Management, Legal Notice 121.
Using waste minimization techniques such as buying in bulk, buying pre-processed foods in the restaurants etc.
Allocating responsibilities for waste management and identifying all sources of wastes, and ensuring wastes are handled by personnel licensed to do so.
Making available suitable facilities for the collection, segregation and safe disposal of the wastes.
Creating waste collection areas with clearly marked facilities such as colour coded bins and providing equipment for handling the wastes. The bins should be coded for plastics, rubber, organics, glass, paper, electrical equipment etc.
Ensuring all wastes are dumped in their designated areas and through legally acceptable methods and that the bins are regularly cleaned and disinfected.
Assessing and creating opportunities for Regulation, Reducing, Reusing, Recycling, Recovering, Rethinking and Renovation.
Creating adequate facilities for the storage of materials and chemicals and controlling access to these facilities.
Ensuring bins are protected from rain and animals.



OSH risks


Employing and EHS/OSH plan.
Provision of PPEs to all personnel working in potentially hazardous areas or with potentially hazardous equipment, and replacing the PPEs on wear and tear.
Placing readable signs alerting people of hazardous such as for slippery floors.
Servicing equipment and machine to ensure efficiency.
Providing fire fighting equipment and maintaining them to ensure they are fully functional.
Delineating fire and emergency assembly points and creating awareness to ensure all people at site are aware of them, e.g. through the use maps on elevators, staircases etc.
Putting in place and ERP and ensuring all people in the project are aware of it and the procedures to follow commensurate to the level of emergency.
Providing adequate storage for hazardous and flammable substances and controlling access to them.
Monitoring the movement, handling and management of wastes to ensure they safely managed and don’t present any EHS risks.
Working state agencies in the management of emergencies and disasters to ensure multilateral and inter-sectoral approaches to this management.
Performing emergency drills on a frequent basis, setting benchmarks for response and evaluating performance to ensure continuous improvement of response and preparedness.


Generation of noise


Erecting signs and notifying other users of noisy activities.
Conducting all noisy activities during the day when permissible levels are higher.
Provision of PPEs such as ear plugs for employees working in noisy conditions or with noisy equipment.
Using equipment with low noise ratings or noise reduction technologies such as for the generators.
Carrying out the decommissioning works only during the specified time from 0800 hrs. to 1700 hrs. where permissible levels of noise are high and acceptable.
Machineries should be maintained regularly to reduce noise resulting from friction.
Providing workers with Personal Protective Equipment such as earmuffs when operating noisy machinery and when in a noisy environment.
Provision of bill boards at the construction site gates notifying people of the activities and timings.
Shielding the area to reduce noise propagation.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi City County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8448895           National Environment Management Authority.

