
				Page: 256GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  685
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OF FERTILIZER PLANT ON PLOT L.R NO. CHEPTIRET/CHEPLASKEI BLOCK 1 (CHESEGEM)/73 AT NGERIA AREA OF UASIN GISHU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Toyota Tsusho East Africa Limited, has proposed the development of a fertilizer plant which will involve the construction and installation of dry blending fertilizer plant. The blending process is a straight forward mechanical process that involves mixing of mineral feedstock fertilizer and primary/secondary nutrients so as to produce soil and crop specific fertilizers. This is not a chemical process and does not involve any chemical reaction or produce emission. The proposed site on land parcel L.R. No. Cheptiret/Cheplaskei Block 1 (Chesegem)/73 at Ngeria area of Uasin Gishu County is located on about 2 acre parcel of land and it is roughly 12 km. before Eldoret on Nakuru Eldoret Road just past Ngeria Shopping Centre.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmnetal Issue


Mitigation Measures


Extraction site impacts and demand of raw materials in construction


Source building materials from suppliers who use environmentally friendly processes in their operations.
Ensure accurate budgeting and estimation of actual construction material requirements to ensure that the least amount of material necessary is ordered.
Ensure that damage or loss of materials at the construction site are kept minimal through proper storage.
Use at least 5%-10% recycled, refurbished or salvaged materials to reduce the use of raw materials and divert material from landfills.


Increased runoff and soil erosion


Create storm water management practices, such as piping systems or retention ponds or tanks, which can be carried over after the building is complete.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as levelling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.
Create storm water management practices, such as piping systems or retention ponds or tanks, which can be carried over after the building is complete.


Waste generation and ensure efficient solid waste management during construction


Through accurate estimation of the sizes and quantities of materials required, order materials in the sizes and quantities they will be needed, rather than cutting them to size, or having large quantities of residual materials.
Ensure that construction materials left over at the end of construction will be used in other projects rather than being disposed of.
Donate recyclable/reusable or residual materials to local community groups, institutions and individual local residents or home owners.
Use of durable, long-lasting materials that will not need to be replaced as often, thereby reducing the amount of construction waste generated over time.


Dust emissions


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.


Exhaust emissions


Ensure proper planning of transportation of materials to ensure that vehicle fills are increased in order to reduce the number of trips done per vehicle or the number of vehicles on the road.
Sensitise truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/offloading points and parking areas, and to switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points.


Noise and vibration


Sensitise construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitise construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, commercial areas and hospitals.
Ensure that all generators and heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.


Increased energy consumption


Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.
Ensure planning of transportation of materials to ensure that fossil fuels (diesel, petrol) are not consumed in excessive amounts.
Monitor energy use during construction and set targets for reduction of energy use.


Increased water consumption


Promptly detect and repair of water pipe and tank leaks.
Sensitise staff to conserve water by avoiding unnecessary toilet flushing etc.
Promote recycling and reuse of water as much as possible.


Liquid effluent


Provide means for handling sewage generated by construction workers
Conduct regular checks for sewage pipe blockages or damages since such vices can lead to release of the effluent into the land and water bodies.


Minimization of solid waste generation and ensuring more efficient solid waste management


Provide solid waste handling facilities such as waste bins and skips.
Ensure that solid waste generated at the development is regularly disposed of appropriately at authorised dumping sites.
Ensure that employees manage waste efficiently through recycling, reuse and proper disposal procedures.
Donate redundant but serviceable equipment to charities and institutions.
Provide solid waste handling facilities such as waste bins and skips.


Minimise risks of sewage release into environment


Provide adequate and safe means of handling sewage generated at the factory.
Conduct regular inspections for sewage pipe blockages or damages and fix appropriately.
Ensure regular monitoring of the sewage discharged from the project to ensure that the stipulated sewage/effluent discharge rules and standards are not violated.


Minimize energy consumption


Install occupation sensing lighting at various locations such as storage areas which are not in use all the time.
Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points within the fruit factory instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.
Monitor energy use during the operation of the project and set targets for efficient energy use.
Sensitise apartment occupants to use energy efficiently.


Minimize water consumption and ensure more efficient and safe water use


Promptly detect and repair of water pipe and tank leaks.
Residents to conserve water e.g. by avoiding unnecessary toilet flushing.
Ensure taps are not running when not in use.
Install a discharge meter at water outlets to determine and monitor total water usage.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Uasin Gishu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8406324           National Environment Management Authority

