
				Page: 258GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  687
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED ELDORET BY-PASS ROAD PROJECT IN UASIN GISHU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Kenya National Highway, is proposing Eldoret By-Pass Road Project in Uasin Gishu County. The  proposed  by-pass  will  commence at  Cheplaskei  Trading  Centre  located  about 20 km. from the town centre  along A104, passes through  Kapseret Trading Centre on the Eldoret –Kapsabet–Kisumu Road and ends at Leserunear  Maili Tisa  (junction with A104 road  and Eldoret–Kitale Road). The project road stretches for about 31 km. and is only motorable on a few sections hence very low traffic. The by-pass corridor road traverses 2No. districts, namely Wareng and Eldoret West districts. The proposed road alignment necessitates the acquisition of land through the farmlands while the sections  that  will  not  be  affected  by  the  construction  will  be  retained  for  frontage  access  to  the individual  properties  along  the  alignment. 
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental and Social Issue 


Mitigation Measures 


Land degradation and soil loss
 


Comprehensive environment impact assessment study shall be undertaken for all construction camp sites and approved by NEMA before commencement.
Construction wastes (including spoil earth, oils/grease, vegetation and other materials) be disposed off in approved dumping areas.
Prepare a management and rehabilitation plan for construction camp sites as well as the materials extraction sites.
Construction camps and materials sites be restored back to their original conditions upon project completion.
Avoid alignments/deep cuts susceptible to soil erosion.
Minimize disturbance of the wetland vegetation during bridge construction.



Air quality
 


Ensure constant watering of construction sections and dry materials piles to keep dust low throughout the project areas.
Similar measures will be necessary at the material sites as well as the access road for the delivery trucks.
Maintain construction machinery and vehicles at reasonable state of service to minimize unnecessary exhaust emission into the atmosphere.


Noise and vibrations
 


Potential disturbance to residential, commercial and institutional premises along the proposed corridor.
Noise and vibrations caused by heavy construction machinery could potentially cause damage to buildings along the construction areas and materials sites.
Non-compliance with the elevated noise and vibrations regulations is a likely health risk to the immediate residents or business communities.
Non-observance with the occupational health and safety to the construction workers.


Drainage
 


Integrate drainage system in the overall bypass road planning and construction such as to discharge into the nearest natural water courses.
Harmonize drainage with all point sources of surface runoff.
All culverts be designed on the basis of hydrological studies such to carry peak runoff.
Drainage outfalls should not be directed into private plots or premises.
Ensure protection of soil adjacent to the side drains and the constructed drainage outfalls.
Maintain the natural flow patterns of water across the landscape with minimal concentration of water flows.


Topography and physiology
 


Material sites should be rehabilitated and restored to near the original status as soon as they are exhausted to restore the micro-topographical outlook.
Road sections with significant cuttings should be done such as not to lose compatibility with the adjoining land areas.
Any raised structures should be attractive and easy to use by the road users, e.g. foot bridges.


Material sites
 


Environmental impact assessments (EIA) to be undertaken prior to extraction of materials from identified sites and approved by NEMA.
Operations of the materials sites to be guided by respective management plans established and approved under the ESIA.
Material extractions and delivery should only be done during the day.
If borrow pits and quarries are operated, they be fenced off for safety of the neighbouring residents.
Rehabilitation of materials sites to take place upon exhaustion (Contractors will provide appropriate rehabilitation plans for each material site and will not demobilize until restoration is complete).
Material extraction should be done in dump conditions to keep dust low, especially if it is located within settled areas.
Consider establishment of boreholes to provide construction water as opposed to abstraction from the constraint surface water sources.
Oil storage areas should be slabbed and provided with oil interceptors and clean exit drains from the camp sites and oil storage yards.
Obtain water permits for the identified abstraction point for the construction water.
Ensure adequate provision of personal protective equipment (dust mask, ear plugs) and sensitization on use.


Social impacts
 


Appropriate and adequate awareness creation and social engineering to all stakeholders, especially residents will need to be undertaken.
Information signage and information will need to be erected during construction.
There should be continuous watering of the road during construction to control dust.
Dust masks and first aid kits should be provided to the construction workers.
Provide motor able deviation routes that are accessible and usable during construction by the residents.
Provide alternative accesses across the construction areas to social facilities.
There should be public announcements as to when and where public amenities are to be affected.
In addition, the relocation of public amenities and services along the road corridors need to be done timely and speedily.
Local community should be given first priority when recruiting road casual labourers and consider all genders.


Safety
 


Maintain all construction road sections dump to prevent dust emissions.
Facilitate flow of surface runoff along the project roads to avoid unnecessary flooding.
Ensure driving discipline among the drivers and other construction workers with respect to the public safety.
Enhance information and appropriate signage at all time along deviations and work areas.
Ensure Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) requirements are observed at all times during the construction.
Identify appropriate locations for installation of cattle and pedestrian crossings as part of the road project (footbridges, underpasses, crossing rumps, etc.).
Provision of fences around the quarry and camp site areas, areas especially at the camp site.



Traffic management including traffic deviations
 


Avoid to the extent possible deviating traffic into the private land to minimize conflicts (confine deviations within the acquired corridor).
Where necessary, the affected deviation roads should be maintained well for the period of construction.
Appropriate signage and information will be provided at all the deviations (beginning and end points).
Ensure all deviations are maintained for smooth flow of traffic.
Information on the intention any sections of the abutting passages early to prepare the residents.


Waste management
 


Spoil generated be disposed off on pre-identified and approved locations (impact assessment should be completed for the locations).
Involve the local residents on the removal and disposal of the spoil and solid wastes to approved dumping areas.
Camp sites shall be provided with appropriate solid waste holding receptacles to be regularly emptied for disposal.
Construction camp management to provide an inventory of waste and an acceptable waste management plan.


Displacement issues
 


Complete the RAP report and verify provisions therein in collaboration with key stakeholders.
Undertake comprehensive compensation process and ensure compensation before commencement of the project works. 
Ensure livelihoods restorations where disrupted
Institute legal provisions for acquisition of encroached road reserve.


Road safety and public health
 


Provide speed controls (speed bumps and information) at high population areas.
Ensure pedestrian foot-paths are secure and clear at times.
Provide foot bridges OR underpasses at high population areas as appropriate.
Display appropriate road signage/information and enforce compliance with requirements.
Enhance compliance plans for public transport vehicles plying the routes.
Encourage road safety campaigns to create awareness on road safety.
Sensitize landowners on appropriate land use practices and compatible development structures.
Integrate compliance in vehicular maintenance into the national regulations.


Land use changes
 


Involve the County Government and the Physical Planning Departments in appropriate land use planning regulations along the corridors.
Influence appropriate land use planning in view of future traffic management aspects.


Drainage management
 


Ensure no drainage outfall leads into private property.
Develop a policy for the roads regard drainage outfall management, e.g. acquisition of the outfalls.
KeNHA to develop policy guidance for the project on securing natural drainage outfalls without significant land use conflicts.
The road surface shall discharge surface runoff such as to avoid roadside flooding or discharges into adjacent residential plots.
Consider imposing heavy penalties to truck drivers and operators found washing trucks and other vehicles along the road reserve and other undesignated sections of the road.
Provide adequate drainage system at the truck parking yards to cater for washing water.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Uasin Gishu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8448878         National Environment Management Authority.

