
				Page: 1385GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4104
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(Cap. 286)
COMPLETION OF PART DEVELOPMENT PLANS
(PDP No. MKN/78/2014/01–proposed sites for:
County Executive Offices,
Governor and Deputy Governor’s Residence,
Land Bank for Educational Use,
South Eastern Kenya University,
Aka Housing Co-operative Society,
Makueni Workers Sacco,
National Housing Corporation,
Land Bank for Future Development.
NOTICE given that preparation of the above named part Development plans were completed on the 25thMarch, 2014.  The Part Development plans relate to land situated within Wote Township of Makueni County.
Copies of the part development plans as have been prepared deposited for public inspection at the offices of the Director of Lands and Urban Planning, County Commissioner and the County Secretary, Makueni County.
The Copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons at the above mentioned addresses between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. on working days.
Any interested persons who wish to make representations in connection with or objection to the above named Part Development Plans may send such representations or objections in writing to be receivedby the Director of Lands and Urban Planning, of P.O. Box 78 Makueni within (60) days from the date of publication of this notice.  Any such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
Dated the 4th July, 2014.
B. K. NG’ENY,
MR/7268757            for Director of Physical Planning.  
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4105
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(Cap. 286)
COMPLETION OF PART DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(PDP No. CKR/222/15/01 for existing camp for Kenya National Highway Authority
NOTICE is given that the above-mentioned part development plan was on 20th March, 2015, completed.
The part development plan relate to land situated within Kirinyaga County, Mwea West Sub-county.
Copies of the part development plan have been deposited for public inspection at the offices of the County Physical Planning Officer, Kirinyaga, at the County Commissioner’s Office, Kirinyaga Central and the Deputy Commissioners Office, Mwea West.
The copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons interested at the County Physical Planning Officer, Kirinyaga, at the County Commissioner’s Office, Kirinyaga Central and the Deputy Commissioners Office, Mwea West, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m., Monday to Friday.
Any interested person who wishes to make any representation in connection with or objection to the above-named part development plans may send such representations or objections in writing to be received by the County Physical Planning Officer, P.O. Box 483, Kerugoya, within sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this notice and such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
Dated the 25th March, 2015.
W. L. LOKA,
MR/7413885 for Director of Physical Planning.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4106
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(Cap. 286)
COMPLETION OF PART DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(PDP No. R172/2015/01 for existing Roads Camp (KenHA)-Rumuruti Township) 
NOTICE is given that the above-mentioned part development plan was completed.
The part development plan relate to land situated within Rumuruti Township.
Copies of the part development plan have been deposited for public inspection at the offices of the County Physical Planning Officer, Laikipia, (Nema Block), Laikipia County Government offices Nanyuki and Rumuruti.
The copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons interested at the County Physical Planning Officer, Laikipia, (Nema Block), Laikipia County Government offices (Nanyuki and Rumuruti, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m., Monday to Friday.
Any interested person who wishes to make any representation in connection with or objection to the above-named part development plan may send such representations or objections in writing to be received by the County Physical Planning Officer, P.O. Box 823–10400, Nanyuki, within sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this notice and such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
Dated the 7th April, 2015.
J. M. WASUA,
MR/7413885 for Director of Physical Planning.  
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4107
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(Cap. 286)
COMPLETION OF PART DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(PDP No. MKN/87/2011/01 for re-sealing Camp for Kenya National Highways Authority, Sultan Hamud
NOTICE is given that the above-mentioned part development plan was on 25th January, 2015, completed.
The part development plan relate to land situated within Sultan Hamud Township of Makueni County.
Copies of the part development plans have been deposited for public inspection at the offices of the Director of Lands and Urban Planning, Deputy County Commissioner, Mukaa and the County Secretary, Makueni County.
The copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons interested at the Director of Lands and Urban Planning, Deputy County Commissioner Mukaa and the County Secretary Makueni County, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m., Monday to Friday.
Any interested person who wishes to make any representation in connection with or objection to the above-named part development plans may send such representations or objections in writing to be received by the Director of Lands and Urban Planning, of P.O. Box 78, Makueni, within sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this notice and such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
Dated the 27th March, 2015.
B. K. NG’ENY,
MR/7413885 for Director of Physical Planning.

