
				Page: 1387GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3921
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED REALIGNMENT OF THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY (SGR) WITHIN NAIROBI NATIONAL PARK, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Kenya Railways Corporation, is proposing a realignment of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) within Nairobi National Park, Nairobi County.
The Project involves the line construction at mileage range DK455+650 - DK464+500 within Nairobi National Park and with total length of 8.85km, including the construction of subgrade, culverts and bridge engineering, The SGR will be a single track railway with a track gauge of 1435mm, with design speed of 120Km/h for passenger train and 80Km for freight transport. The rail track will be made of ballast with internal combustion traction category with reserved conditions for future electrification.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impact 


Proposed Mitigation Measures 


Loss of wildlife habitat and habitat fragmentation
 


Restrict vegetation clearance to only the working area of 130m.
Where possible avoid cutting down the indigenous trees within the 130m but out of the actual rail route.
Compensate for lost vegetation through landscaping with suitable indigenous plants.
KWS and KRC to compensate lost wildlife habitat by identifying a parcel of land suitable for wildlife conservation and acquiring it for that purpose.


Potential increase in poaching
 


Sensitize all persons involved in the SGR construction work within the national park area on the importance of conservation and that they should not engage in illegal activities within the Park.
Prepare and provide conservation awareness materials in the project site. This to include large posters with information on conservation, procedures to be followed when operating in a protected area, park rules and regulations.
Provide information on the legal implication of anyone found dealing wildlife products.
Enhance KWS security patrols in the area.


Human wildlife conflicts
 


Sensitize all personnel working on the project on park rules and regulations.
Ensure a new electric fence is constructed connecting the two fences before demolishing sections of the existing eastern boundary fence.
Enhance KWS problem animal control efforts.
KWS Nairobi National Park management to provide a hotline for reporting HWC incidents.


Fire risk
 


Sensitize the workers on park rules and regulations.
Provide fire extinguishers in the working area and or provide emergency numbers for the Nairobi fire brigades.


Land and soil degradation
 


Avoid unnecessary movement of soil materials from the site and provide soil conservation structures on the areas prone to soil erosion mostly to reduce impact by the surface run-off
Depending on the period, monitor construction activities for appropriate and effective control measures of erosion e.g. during rainy / wet conditions, ensure suitable barriers on potential water erosion paths.
Conduct standard landscaping after project completion i.e. resurface (pave) open areas after the completion of the project and introduce suitable (indigenous plants) and well-managed vegetation to generate surface covers on the open areas; to control soil movement by erosion agents. Grasses found in the area like Pennisetum mezianum, Themeda triandra, Digitaria scalarum and Sporobolus pyramidalis
Ensure suitable storm water drainage channels. Such channels need to be regularly maintained and repaired to avoid point discharges which have pronounced effect on soil erosion in case of breakages or blockages.
Restrict operation in the 130m land use area.


Air pollution
 


Provide personal protective equipment, materials and clothing such as nose masks and goggles to workers during construction.
Ensure regular and prompt maintenance of construction machinery and equipment. This will minimize generation of hazardous gases and other suspended particulate matter.
Sprinkle water in areas being excavated and along the tracks used by the transport trucks within the site.
Use environmentally friendly fuels such as unleaded gasoline.
Ensure that vehicles drive only on designated roads/driveways (avoid off road driving as much as is possible). Vehicles transporting construction materials to the site move at the recommended park speed of 40Km/hr.


Noise pollution
 


Construction works should be carried out only during the specified time i.e. from 0700 hours to 1800 hours on the section that is within the NNP.
Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery when not in use.
Machineries should be maintained regularly to reduce noise.
There should be no unnecessary hooting of the involved machinery and vehicles.
Workers should be provided with relevant personal protective equipment (PPE).
Observe the provisions of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009.


Solid waste disposal
 


Generated waste should be handled and disposed through sound waste management strategies as per the prevailing regulatory provisions in the Environmental Management and Coordination (Waste Management) Regulations, 2006.
During all the project phases waste should be properly segregated to encourage recycling of some useful waste materials; i.e. some stone and concrete materials remains can be used as backfills. This calls for source reduction, recycling and reuse.
During the operation phase sensitize the railway users on waste management and provide waste receptacles at designated points like terminals and in the passenger and freight locomotives for use while on transit.


Oil leaks and spills
 


Ensure use of serviceable machinery.
Maintenance services should be carried out in known designated service bays more suitably outside the project area.
All oil products and materials should be stored in the site store and should be handled appropriately to avoid spills and leaks.


Visual intrusion
 


On completion the worked area should be restored through proper landscaping and planting of more vegetation so as to blend with existing environment.
All solid waste and debris of spoil material from construction activities must be collected upon completion.


Occupational safety and health
 


All workers should be provided with Appropriate personal protective gear. These include working overalls, helmets, goggles, earmuffs, masks, and gloves among others.
The requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2007, the Building Code and other relevant regulations should be strictly adhered to.
A first aid kit(s) should be provided within the site and it should be fully equipped at all times during construction.
At least one person in the workforce should be trained in administering first aid.
The contractor should not expose workers to stress inducing factors.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413860 National Environment Management Authority.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4108
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CEMENT GRINDING PLANT WITHIN KAPLALACH AREA, SOIN, KERICHO COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent Rai Cement Limited is proposing a Cement Grinding Plant within Kaplalach Area, Soin,  Kericho County.
The proposed development will involve the installation of one cement mill with the capacity to produce 2000 tonnes of cement from raw materials such as clinker, additives, gypsum and puzzolona. The technology to be used will be the most advanced in the market. The process will involve the following steps: Unloading of raw materials in the yard, Crushing of gypsum using gypsum crasher and storing it in the yard, Transporting of raw materials using belt conveyors to proportioning hoppers, Mixing of gypsum and other additives in a predetermined ration with clinker, Grinding of mixture of clinker, gypsum and additives to powder form in ball mill. The resultant mixture is called Portland cement, Storing of cement in cement silo, and Packing of cement in bags by automatic packing machines and Loading of cement into trucks/store by truck loading machine.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impacts


Proposed Mitigation Measures


Noise


Programme work to take minimum time.
Enforce workers discipline on site.
Use good, serviceable machinery.
Inform residents of impending work.
Observe discipline during operations.
Observe the provisions of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009.


Dust


Provide workers with dust mask and appropriate protective gear.
Moisten surfaces to be worked on.
Excavate only necessary area.


Surface runoff


Programme work to take shortest time.
Excavate only necessary area.


Decreased air quality due to dust emissions and C02


Apply latest dust arresters and equipment to curb emissions.
Study ways or reusing captured dust.
Use energy efficiently to reduce C02 emissions.


Soil erosion


Restrict excavation to required area.
Use as much soil as possible in backfilling operations.
Avoid working in rainy conditions Programme work to take least time.
Excavate only required area.


Debris deposition


Recover all debris and dispose properly.
Re-use any wastes as is applicable.
Recover all debris and replaced parts.
Re-use and recycle any materials as is appropriate.


Diminished landscape quality


Paint mast to blend with natural environment as possible.
Plant appropriate trees, flowers and shrubs if space allows.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kericho County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/741400 National Environment Management Authority.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4109
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MWANGEA IRRIGATION PROJECT IN GANZE, MAGARINI AND MALINDI SUB-COUNTIES, KILIFI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (National Irrigation Board) is proposing to put up an irrigation project in Ganze, Magarini and Malindi Sub-Counties of Kilifi County.
The Mwangea Irrigation Development Project will put an estimated 1500 ha of land into irrigated agriculture, which will lead to food security and make it possible for the local communities to draw economic benefits from the land and water resources available.
The proposed irrigation development project intends to abstract water from Galana/Sabaki River. Scour pipes, screens and intake chambers, in addition to other appurtenances will be provided during design of these structures.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


Loss of Biodiversity


Establishment of tree nurseries.
Planting and care of vegetation to restore the lost species.
Restoration of the lost biodiversity.


Soil Erosion and Siltation


Compaction of the loose soil.
Topsoil from quarries and burrow areasmust be rehabilitated.
Landscaping.
Slope stabilization.
Planting of grass and other vegetationto hold the soil firmly.
Building of gabions where severe effects are expected.
Provision of silt traps in drainagestructures.


Pollution


Sprinkling water during construction phase to avoid dust being blown bywind or construction vehicles.
Regular servicing of the machines andconstruction vehicles to avoid theemission of smoke and other gases. This will also reduce the intensity of thenoise being generated.
Proper collection and disposal of wasteoil and grease to avoid soil and water pollution.


Interference with Traffic
Flow


Proper and clearly visible road signsshould be erected.
Alternative routes to be established aswell as upgrading the gravel road to theintake.
Provide traffic wardens.
Servicing of vehicles and plant inproper garage and workshop.


Occupational Health and Safety


Comply with Kenyan safety policy andsafe working procedures, laws, regulation.
Appointment of Health, Safety (OSH)and Environment Officer.
Training of workers should be providedso as to acquaint them on the operationof the machinery and equipment toavoid danger to users.
The management should provide theworkers with safety instruction manualsand safety gear.
Provide footpaths and diversions asnecessary.
Enhance supervision of workers.
Install warning and directional signs tocontrol traffic.
Station traffic wardens on work sitesalong the roads and crossings.
Maintain roads in good state of repair.
Provision of health safety and welfareplans and procedures to workers on site.
Establishment of a clinic for emergency response plans.
Establish and monitor performance ofhealth and safety committee as per the safety regulations.
Develop a site safety action plandetailing safety equipment to be used, emergency procedures, restrictions onsite, frequency and personnelresponsible for safety inspections and controls.
All injuries that occur on site must berecorded in the accident register andcorrective actions for their preventionbe instigated as appropriate (Section 62of the Factories and Other Places of Work Act) emergency preparedness Programme should be established.


Insecurity


Setting up of an effective internalsecurity unit to work in liaison with thepolice and administration.
The construction camp should be wellsecured and patrolled at all times.
Provide fire prevention installations andalarm in the compound.


Interference with the flowof Galana River


Provision of sluice gates and spillwaysto ensure continuous flow is enhanced.


Soil Erosion and Siltation


Establishment of tree nurseries.
Silt traps should be put in place.
De-silting of the silt traps should bedone regularly.
Protection of steep cuttings should bedone by landscaping and to someextend building of gabions wherenecessary.
Terracing also should be done toreduce the velocity of water flow andhence reduced erosion.
Planting of vegetation like grass, treesand shrubs in the disfigured environment.
The catchment should be conserved byplanting of woodlands and otherrelevant flora.


Pollution from agrochemicals


Proper training on application ofagrochemicals.
Use of natural fertilizers.
Practicing organic farming.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413803 National Environment Management Authority.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4110
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED DONGO KUNDU - MARIAKANI 400 KV ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION LINE IN KILIFI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Electricity Transmission Company) is proposing to construct approximately 50kms 400kV Electrical Transmission Line (TL) from Dongo Kundu to Mariakani in Kilifi County.The project shall comprise of a 400 kV double circuit (D/C) Quad Moose ACSR transmission line from Dongo Kundu to Mariakani.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Aspect


Mitigation measures


Social disturbance, loss of property and livelihoods
 


Civic education, public awareness, and sensitisation on alternatives targeting where applicable both spouses.
Issuance of adequate notices.
Expedited compensation.


Aviation
 


The impact on air flight is assessed to be low to unsignificant at the moment. No airstrip within the vicinity of TL was noted. Furthermore the TL is far enough to affect landings and take offs at the Moi International Airport Mombasa.


Generation of solid wastes and effluent
 


Proper quantification of requirements to avoid redundancies of ordered materials.
Use of high quality, long lasting and well maintained electrical equipment materials.
Segregation of solid wastes to encourage recycling / reuse at the contractors camp, workshop and at the tower sites.
Monitor amount of waste generated per given period with a view of continuously reducing the waste generated.


Air quality
 


Provide appropriate PPEs to workers (dust masks and noise mufflers).
Deliver construction materials early in the morning when it is less windy and the materials are damp with dew.
Use low speeds while delivering materials.
In case of excessive dust, sprinkle materials and working areas with water.


Soil degradation
 


Plan construction to coincide with dry weather.
Minimise use of heavy equipment by favouring human labour.
Avoid dragging of construction material on the ground to deter creating of soil erosion channels.
In heavily compacted areas, such as lorry tracks, offloading sites and assembling points, disturb the soil, then mulch it to encourage quick plant regeneration.
Monitor soil erosion levels and compare with published data for need to undertake additional corrective measures.


Ground water resources
 


This impact is subtle to insignificant. Best engineering and construction practices can completely avoid this potential impact.
Uncontrolled discharge of effluents into the ground or groundwater aquifer must be avoided. Furthermore these risks could be managed by:
use of well-maintained vehicles and equipment,
implementation of an adequate effluent management, and
Suitableorganization of the construction site.
Due to the limited time of the construction activities and the character of the project, this impact is insignificant if mitigation measures are applied.


Loss of Vegetation (Trees, woodlands)
 


For the public land owners who will be affected, trees taller than 5 m will be compensated and hence the commercial value of the tree will be restored to the owners. The impact on ground cover will be restricted to the initial construction period, after which the ground cover is expected to be restored by alternative land use by the landowners.
Trees lost due to opening of access roads to the tower pads, to be compensates by planting of trees on roadsides other public places such as schools, or degraded sites, etc.
Adhere strictly to prescribed dimensions of 30m corridor in clearing of vegetation.
Monitor the biodiversity index over time in the project areas.


Visual intrusion
 


This is a permanent impact. However visual intrusion could be lessened by planting trees around the towers while keeping the 30m corridor clear.


Accidents and electrocution hazards
 


Adhere to stipulations of the OSHA 2007 during construction and operation.
Use well trained (including in first aid) properly supervised and adequately insured workers during construction.
Ensure use of PPEs during construction.
Ensure use of properly maintained equipment.
Use construction materials that meet stipulated standards.
Ensure all the construction is done to specification and it is duly certified
Mark the wires to international standards to warn low flying planes.
Create public awareness on dangers of OHL.
Fix appropriate danger signage on each pylon.
Deter scaling of the pylon by use of razor /barbed wire to ring-fence the pylon about 10 feet from the ground near schools and densely populated areas.
Supervise the way-leave at least once a year to maintain the way-leave devoid of any high vegetation.
Ensure workers adhere strictly to provided safety precautions when undertaking any repairs and maintenance activities.
Undertake regular drills on emergency preparedness in case of accidents.
Monitor cases of accidents and near misses.


Terrestrial fauna especially bird strikes
 


If noted during operation:
Erect perching platforms on top of pylons.
Mark some of the wires to make them more visible to birds.
Monitor number of electrocuted birds and those lost to collision and compare with published data to made decision on effectiveness of measures taken


Electromagnetic Field and corona effect
 


Evaluating potential exposure to the public against the reference levels developed by the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). Average and peak exposure levels should remain below the ICNIRP recommendation for General Public Exposure
Reassure the public through public seminars
Final detailed design should avoid densely populated areas and should be at least 200 m away from institutions that use sensitive electronic equipment such as health care facilities, and tertiary learning institutions.
For corona effect, it is recommended that the minimum recommended distance between conductors be observed in order to reduce the humming noise or the corona effect. In addition dumpers should also be installed on the conductors in order to reduce vibration and hence reduce corona effects


Increased cases of vandalism
 


Engage the public to report vandalism through use of manned hotlines.
Rapid response to deter any reported cases of impeding vandalism.
Consider use of advanced technology to deter vandalism by product modification or enhanced detection.
Lobby the Government to elevate the crime of vandalism of electrical installation to the level of economic sabotage.
Monitor number of attempted and accomplished vandalism.


Risk of fire outbreaks
 


Maintain the way-leaves free of fire fuel such as dry biomass .
Partner with other agencies such as Kwale and Mombasa County Governments in fire surveillance and fire fighting.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
K. D. BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413795 National Environment Management Authority.
 

