
				Page: 1101GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3131
TASKFORCE TO SPEARHEAD THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE MIRAA INDUSTRY
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary for Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries has appointed a Taskforce for the development of the miraa industry consisting of the following:
Mwereria Joseph Miriti—(Chairperson);
Kilemi Lucy Nkirote,
Geoffrey Nchooro M’Mwenda,
Kinyua Geoffrey John,
Eliud Kireger,
Alfred Busolo,
Johnson Irungu,
Julius Kiptarus,
Maina Gichuri,
Wilfred O. Onchoke,
1.  The terms of reference of the Taskforce are to—
(a) propose strategies and interventions that will support the development of the miraa industry and specifically;
(i)       lobby for the recovery of lost market for miraa produce;
(ii)     undertake research on miraa agronomy, variety improvement, product development and value addition;
(iii)    provide opportunities for the development of capacity among farmers including but not limited to the identification and  establishment of demonstration farms;
(b) develop policy and legislation on the miraa industry in collaboration with the Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Authority (AFFA);
(c)  collaborate with stakeholders and the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries to promote alternative farming initiatives to reduce over-reliance on miraa; and
(d) undertake any other task that may be assigned by the Cabinet Secretary.
2.  Mode of operation:
In the performance of its functions the Taskforce—
(a) shall regulate its own procedure;
(b) shall prepare and submit to the Cabinet Secretary, its work plan and regularly keep the Cabinet Secretary appraised on its progress;
(c)  shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as it may consider necessary for the discharge of its functions;
(d) may solicit, receive and consider views from members of the public and any interest groups;
(e)  may co-opt not more than three persons who possess the relevant expertise, skills and experience where it considers necessary;
(f)   shall every three months prepare and submit to the Cabinet Secretary reports of its progress;
(g) shall provide interim recommendations for consideration by the Cabinet Secretary within six months of its appointment; and
(h) shall submit a final report to the Cabinet Secretary within one year of its appointment.
3.  Duration:
The Task Force shall remain in force for a period of one year or for such longer period as the Cabinet Secretary may prescribe by notice in the Gazette.
4.  Costs:
The costs incurred by the Taskforce including but not limited to facilitation and payment of allowances in respect of the Secretariat and members of the Taskforce, shall be defrayed from the voted funds of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries.
5.  Secretariat:
The Secretariat of the Taskforce shall be at the State Department of Agriculture, Kilimo House, Cathedral Road, P.O. Box 30028, Nairobi.
ADAN A. MOHAMED,
Ag. Cabinet Secretary for Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries.

