
				Page: 498Gazette Notice No. 1466
STEERING COMMITTEE FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE KENYA CAPITAL MARKETS MASTER PLAN
Appointment
IT IS notified for information of the general public that the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury, for the purposes of developing and promoting Kenya as the heart of capital markets financing in Africa and supporting the establishment of Nairobi as an International Financial Centre has appointed a steering committee to be known as the Capital Markets Master Plan Implementation Steering Committee (CMMISC) which shall consist of—
Cabinet Secretary, National Treasury—(Chairperson);
Members:
The Attorney-General,
Cabinet Secretary, Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries,
Cabinet Secretary, Mining,
The Chief Executive, Capital Markets Authority,
The Governor, Central Bank of Kenya,
The Secretary, National Economic and Social Council,
Director-General, Communication Authority of Kenya,
Chairperson, Financial Sector Regulators Forum,
Terms of Reference
1.  The Terms of Reference of the steering committee shall include—
(a) to take overall responsibility for oversight in the implementation of the Kenya Capital Markets Master Plan and facilitating its alignment with the establishment of—
(i)  Kenya as the heart of Capital Markets financing and investment in Africa; and,
(ii) Nairobi International Financial Centre,
(b) to direct the Capital Markets Authority Board to appoint a taskforce, working groups and relevant subcommittees to facilitate the execution of the Master Plan;
(c)  to direct consultations with relevant government ministries and departments, regulatory agencies, capital markets experts, professional bodies, academics, and other stakeholders for the purposes of executing the Master Plan;
(d) to provide policy direction on the execution of the Capital Markets Master Plan;
2.  The steering committee shall regulate its own procedure;
3.  The Secretariat of the steering committee shall be housed at the offices of the Capital Markets Authority, P.O. Box 78800–00200, Nairobi.
4.  The term of office of the steering committee shall be five (5) years renewable with effect from 1st January, 2015.
Dated the 20th January, 2015.
HENRY K. ROTICH,
Cabinet Secretary, National Treasury

