
				Page: 19
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3253
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED UPGRADING KITALE –ENDEBESS – SUAM (C45) ROAD IMPROVEMENT PROJECT IN TRANS NZOIA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Kenya National Highways Authority proposes the upgrading Kitale–Endebess–Suam (C45) Road improvement project in Trans Nzoia County. The project road starts at the junction with A1 road on the southern part of Kitale traversing Kitale Town on the northerly direction for 3.1 km. up to the junction with Kwanza–Kapenguria Road. From this Junction, the road takes a westerly direction to Endebess Town at km 19+700. From Endebess Town, the road takes north Westerly direction up to Suam Town at Km 45+500 terminating at Suam River Bridge.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:


Environmental parameter


Potential impact


Proposed mitigation measures


Drainage and soil erosion


Four new bridges are expected across several rivers (Sabweni, Kaibei, Mubere and Suam). The bridge crossing river Kaibei may be improved to include a pedestrian walk. Construction works at the new bridges could lead to localized erosion. Furthermore, excavations could lead to sediment transportation during April-October especially between Endebess and Suam which has rugged terrain and higher rainfall.
Culvert outfalls and  mitre drain discharges directed to farmlands can cause new erosion and even affect farm productivity with a direct consequence on family livelihoods.
Soil may erode along the road alignment, particularly during the wet season (April through October) in the initial years after decommissioning.


Partner with KFS to rehabilitate the excavated sites especially on the upstream and downstream of the new bridges.
Optimized new drainage structure positions and improved capacities of the structures used in combination with specific erosion protection works.
Scour checks should be constructed alongside drains on steep slopes.
Consult owners of receiving farms whenever water discharge from mitre drains and culverts are to be directed into their farms. It is however strongly suggested that these outfalls be directed at vegetated areas.
Designing outfalls from culverts and side drains onto farms in such a way that the discharge does not cause soil erosion or adversely affect farm conditions. In some instances when the discharge is on a sloppy terrain then consider lining the outfall up to a point where flow velocity is substantially reduced.
Vegetate all excavated sites immediately works are completed within those sites using local species or those approved by the RE.


Air quality


The project site has well defined wet and dry seasons. The dry seasons tend to be relatively hot and windy conditions that exacerbate generation and blowing away of dust beyond the project site.  Dust pollution could be significant within the Towns, the over 30 institutions close to the road and adjoining settlements.


Use dust suppressants as far as possible, especially within the towns. Increase frequency to at least every 3 hours during the dry season.
All workers should wear dust masks at all times when at the sites of high dust generation.
Provide a system of informing  neighborhoods close to the road of possible generation of dust beyond normal levels.


Soil pollution


Could occur in the event of accidental oil spills, or release of petroleum products and bitumen (amongst other liquid waste) particularly in and around machinery and plant yards, base camps and areas of concentrated activities. These may infiltrate into soils and cause soil pollution.


Mitigation actions will mainly involve maintenance of machinery, bunding the garage/ fuel stations, using drip trays, and directing spills to an oil sump which should be emptied into a designated final disposal site.


Construction water sources


There are adequate water resources in the project area, so conflicts with the local water users are not foreseen. However, consultations are needed prior to commencement of water abstraction.


Acquire WARMA permit for water abstractions.
Consult Water Users Association to gain their support prior to abstraction. 


Global warming /climate change


Climate change projections indicate slight enhancement of rainfall but minimal increase in temperature of 0.7 – 2.10C.


Changes in temperature may not have a direct bearing on the bitumen road, however associated extreme weather events such as higher than normal rainfall days could impact on the road through enhanced erosion and need to design for maximum floods. The design has used a 100 year flood return period which potentially captures extreme weather events between 1960 and todate. This is the period when global warming / climate change related extreme weather events have been noted.


Flora


Other than the dual carriage between Kitale Town and Matisi, and short re-alignment sections where there are sharp bends, the rest of the road will be restricted to the current road reserve. In all cases land cover will be transformed to permanent paved surface, leading to permanent and irreversible loss of vegetation cover.
An indirect impact during operation is the possible opening up of Suam forest to tree poachers and this could lead to enhanced degradation of the forest. The converse can also happen, where cheaper trees from Uganda can easily be accessed and transported thus protecting the Suam Forest.


Design to avoid the old trees that are sporadically found in sections of the road between Kitale and Endebess.
Value the vegetation resources to be affected that are within land to be acquired for appropriate compensation.
Kenya Forest Service should be encouraged to enhance protection of Suam forest and closely monitor movements of forest resources in the area.
Partner with KFS to rehabilitate part of the Suam Plantation Forest area by providing funds to establish or enhance tree nurseries and to assist with out-planting.


Noise and ground vibration


This impact can be of concern only at construction sites within the urban environments of Kitale, Veterinary, Tuwan, Matisi, Mowlem, Endebess, Chepchoina and Suam.
There are over 30 noise-sensitive institutions that are within 300m of the road that include learning institutions, health facilities, homesteads and places of worship.
Where explosives will be used, especially at quarries, there will be serious noise and vibrations in the vicinity of the site. 


At commencement of construction works, map all noise sensitive receptors and prepare a construction plan that avoids excessive noise within proximity of the receptors as appropriate.
Restrict activities that emit loud noise to day time.
Warn residents within 300m of quarries of intention to blast and the exact blasting time.


Visual intrusion


On the whole, there are few scenic sites, but opened up quarries and borrow pits could be of visual intrusion.
Cut slopes and excavated sites that scar the landscape are also sources of visual intrusion.


The contractor to prepare quarry and borrow pit management and rehabilitation plans.
Progressively rehabilitate quarries and borrow pits as work progresses and as per site specific material site rehabilitation plan. The contractor should only demobilize once rehabilitation is complete.


Waste management


Construction waste could be a health hazard and also of visual intrusion.


Develop a waste management plan for use during the entire construction period.
Identify waste disposal sites and ensure the sites are registered with NEMA and the relevant County Government.
Stockpile spoil materials for use in backfilling excavated areas or rehabilitating borrow pits and quarries.


Urbanization


The road could trigger rapid development of urban centres, increase of property values and could promote ribbon settlement pattern beyond Endebess.


Proactive physical planning for the area by Trans Nzoia County.


Socio-cultural impacts


Enhanced social interaction and networking that will further erode indigenous communities’ traditional ways of life as many adapt to hybrid cultures. In addition, there will be cultural diffusion and to some extent, erosion of some values and practices. These could mainly affect the Sabaot community who still value their culture.
Restricted access to public facilities and amenities and even homes.


This may be a positive impact and could also be a negative impact depending on standpoint of an individual.
The County authorities may need to be informed of this potential impact.
Provide accesses to all public institutions and homes adjacent to the road at all times.


Gender


The road will have very positive impacts in reversing gender disparity in regards to access to opportunities that include markets, social facilities and  overall improve thereby improving basic income levels of women and vulnerable groups.


This impact can only be enhanced especially by the contractor adopting the 30% gender rule during construction.
The county government should be informed of the potential positive gender impacts to formulate ways of enhancing the positives.


Resettlement and compensation


There will be some land and property acquisition to allow for re-alignments.
The most affected sections will be Kitale Town due to the dual carriageway. Others are at Mowlem, Tuwan, Kimase and Chepchoina. Overall over 200 individuals will be affected by the project.


A resettlement action plan has been separately undertaken and reported in a separate volume.
The RAP proposes compensation at the current market rates while livelihood activities especially in Kitale Town will be mitigated by providing alternative trading sites.
Lorry park will be provided at Matisi and provision of grain drying yard will be explored at the same site.


Public health


The indirect impacts of the project on health and safety are associated primarily with human behaviour, and this includes the potential for transmission of HIV-AIDS and other STIs.


Integrate HIV AIDS and STIs preventive and awareness programme in the cotract.
Include issuance of free condoms to workers in the BoQ.
Establish a clinic within the Contractors’ camp to attend to workers. 


Road safety


The road is designed for high speed motoring.


Install elaborate road safety signs along the entire road and enforce compliant.
Provide bus parks at all trading centres that can accommodate at least 4 fourteen seater mini-buses.
Construct foot bridges and under-passes at strategic points along the road.
Zebra crossings should be accompanied by speed calming humps.
KeNHA should permanently acquire the road reserve to avoid structures close to the road carriage.


The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Trans Nzoia County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/9327070                                                                                                                         National Environment Management Authority.

 

