
				Page: 22GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3254
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PRELIMINARYAND DETAILED ENGINEERING   DESIGN OF KISIAN–BUSIA (B1) ROAD IN KISUMU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Kenya National Highways Authority, is proposing a preliminary and detailed engineering   design of Kisian–Busia (B1) Road in Kisumu and Busia counties. The project road length is approximately 104 km. and starts at Kisian junction and runs in a westerly direction through Maseno,Yala, Bumala and ends at Busiaboarder post.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Nature of Impact


Mitigation measure taken or to be taken


PLANNING PHASE


Direct land take for road expansion


Land acquisition to be done before the contractor goes to site.
Formulate a detailed Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
Identify and list all the Project Affected People (PAP) by type of losses and extent of damages in an Entitlement Matrix.
Consult Affected Persons (AP's) on, and offer choices among technically and economically feasible resettlement alternatives.
Compensate those affected according to the laid down policies in collaboration with the ministry of lands.
Implement an institutional structure or a mechanism for monitoring and evaluating the compensation/ resettlement process.


Loss of farmland and grazing land for borrow sites and quarries 


The site owner to negotiate for the price and modalities of payment with the contractor.
A clear program for the rehabilitation of all opened Borrow pits and quarries to be drawn up with site owners.


CONSTRUCTION PHASE IMPACTS


Opening and Operation of Borrow Sites, Disposal Sites, Quarries and Asphalt Plant and cement Stabilization Production area


Blasting and rock excavation
 


The structure owners to be compensated to enable them to relocate to a safer distance.
The charges of the blast should be measured so that the blast does not affect the structures at the distance to the railway line.
The blasting contractor to be in possession of all required permits/certificates.
Notification to be given to affected parties including the Engineer, site employees and the public prior to each blasting event.
Blasting plans to comply with blasting regulations.
Transportation, storage facilities and personnel handling explosives to be in accordance with regulations.


Land resources impacts


The valuable top soil containing organic material, nutrients as well as seeds and the soil fauna should be excavated separately and piled in an adequate manner for re-use.


Occupational hazards


Appoint a trained health and safety team for the duration of theconstruction work.
Maintain Occupation hazard occurrence incidence records
The contractor to ensure that all explosive materials are stored in a secured place that is manned 24hours a day.
Quarry blasting operations to be scheduled to minimize disturbance to people and ensure safety of the workers and the community.
Notification to be given to affected parties including the Engineer, site employees and the public prior to each blasting event.
Blasting plans to comply with blasting regulations
Signs to be erected to warn unauthorized personnel of safety hazards.
Regarding activities related to pit and quarries, reference to be made to the National Mines and Geology Act and the Guidelines for the Use of Explosives.
The blasting contractor to be in possession of all required permits/certificates.
Transportation, Storage facilities and personnel handling explosives to be in accordance with regulations.
Install first aid facilities in the risk areas.
Transport patients/causalities to nearest health facility
A chain-link fence and a gate should be installed around the sites to restrain intruders (animals and the public).
The gates will be kept padlocked all the time and only authorized access allowed.
Warning notices, in the appropriate local language(s), will be attached to the fence advising that these are risk areas.


Solid wastes


The contractor to ensure that all waste materials are transported to a place of safe disposal.
Excavated soils and rock ash from the crushes to be used at landfills.


Health impacts


Regular screening


Damage to Biodiversity


Geomorphic disturbance to be minimized by maximizing reserves through deep quarrying The disturbance created by numerous smaller quarries is greater than that created by one large quarry.
Depending on the planned future use for the site and the size of the excavation, pits and quarries to be backfilled with clean mineral soil or granular material, leveled or sloped and if necessary re-vegetated. They can also be used as pan for watering the animal.
Reclamation plans shall be forwarded to NEMA or the Engineer. They can also be used as pan for watering the animal. Reclamation plans shall be forwarded to NEMA or the Engineer.
A clear program for the rehabilitation of all opened Borrow pits and quarries to be drawn up with site owners and rehabilitation to be done at the end of the project.


Ambient air quality


The impacts from asphalt plant-generated dust will be mitigated by use of dry or wet control systems or any other effective dust palliative measures.
Dry techniques include covers on conveyors, vacuum systems, and bag houses, which remove dust before the air stream is released to the atmosphere.
Wet suppression systems consists of pressurized water (or surfactant treated water) sprays located at dust generating sites throughout the plant.
The location and operation of asphalt batch plants to be sited as far as possible from sensitive receptors, such as shopping centers, health facilities and learning institutions.
Regular dust collection, removal and water sprinkling at the asphalt mixing and cement stabilization yards.
Fugitive dust from blasting to be controlled by proper design and execution of blasts e.g. when there are no prevailing winds.
Workers to be protected from dust through the use of enclosed, air-conditioned cabs on equipment and, where necessary, the use of respirators.
Workers exposed to dust will have dust masks and a 500ml packet of milk per working shift
Safety to include regular health screening.


Noise generation


Landscaping, berms, and stockpiles can be constructed to form sound barriers.
Noisy equipment (such as crushers) can be located away from populated areas and can be enclosed in sound-deadening structures.
Conveyors can be used instead of trucks for in-pit movement of materials.
Noisy operations can be scheduled or limited to certain times of the day to minimize disturbance to people and ensure safety of the workers and the community.
The proper location of access roads, the use of acceleration and deceleration lanes, and careful routing of trucks can help reduce truck noise.
Workers can be protected from noise through the use of enclosed, air-conditioned cabs on equipment and, where necessary, the use of hearing protectors.
Workers safety to include regular health screening.


CONSTRUCTION CAMP IMPACTS


Loss of vegetation
 


The first choice for selecting a site for the construction camp shall be previously cleared sites or natural openings. This will minimize unnecessary clearing.


Health


Employ a ground person to ensure the compound is clean to keep away disease causing pests.
Condom dispensers to be located in appropriate locations within the camp and the camp environs such as in public toilets in market centers.
Intensify awareness on HIV/AIDS by use of bill boards in market centers and along the project road.
Workers and the surrounding communities to be sensitized on awareness, prevention and management of HIV/AIDS through staff training, awareness campaigns, multi-media and workshops or during community ‘Barazas’.
The contractor to provide VCT centers along the route in collaboration with the ministry of health.
Adequate safe drinking water to be provided.
All waste water from the utilities like the offices, kitchen and sanitation facilities to be channeled to waste water treatment plant or constructed soak pits.
Pit latrines to be used in remote areas where no plumbing is available. All pit latrines must conform to the Public Health Act and be subject to the approval of the local public health officer.
The problems of alcohol abuse must be explained to workers as a part of the health education program.
Severe penalties for drunkenness and disorderly behavior must be given out along with the provision of counseling services for substance abuse.


Risk of fire


Firefighting equipment to be provided.
The staff to be trained on how to use the firefighting equipment.
Service program for the firefighting equipment should be in place.
Fire safety awareness campaign to be done to ensure preparedness.


Insecurity


A qualified security firm must be hired to handle security issues in collaboration with the Kenya Police.
Incidences involving security must be recorded and shared with Kenya police.
Proper site fencing and security guards will be in place to safeguard contractor property and safety and control movements.
The contractor will engage manned security to record and process entry into camps and contractor's plant sites.
The site will be securely fenced and security put in place to protect the facilities.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kisumu County.
(d) County Director of Environment, Busia County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/9327069         National Environment Management Authority.

