
				Page: 1833GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5655
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CORAL DRIVE APARTMENTSON PLOT L.R NO. 3587/I/MN WITHIN NYALI AREA, MOMBASA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Spacemaster Properties Limited) is proposing to construct Coral Drive Apartments on Plot L.R. No. 3587/I/MN, Nyali Area, Mombasa County.
The proposed project involves the construction, subsequent occupation and possible decommissioning of residential apartments and auxiliary amenities, christened Coral Drive Apartments. The development will feature three (3) residential apartment blocks, each consisting of Ground, 1st – 4th floors.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental & Social Impacts


Mitigation measures


Occupational health and safety of workers


Contractor to comply with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) by registering the site as a workplace and providing workers with appropriate Personal Protective Equipment. (PPE).


Solid waste at the construction site


Procure the services of a NEMA licensed waste handler to manage solid waste from the construction site.
All recyclable materials should be collected and sent to a licensed company for recycling.


Air pollution


Contractor to deploy fine dust screens at the project site during construction.
Sprinkle dust producing material such as ballast with water during offloading on site.
Use serviceable machinery and vehicles for supply of raw materials.


Noise pollution


Delivery of raw materials to site to be done only during the day.
No delivery of raw materials should be undertaken during the weekends


Insecurity


Proponent and contractor to vet all workers on site.
Require certificates of good conductor from potential employees and copies of identification documents for all workers to be retained by the contractor.


Speed and neighborhood safety concerns


Erect speed limit signage along the access road.
Compel drivers to comply with the recommended speeds.


Solid waste generation


Provide litter bins that encourage the separation of wastes for recycling
Contract a NEMA licensed solid waste handler to manage waste from the development.


Sewage management


Installation of a bio-digester to treat sewage from the development.


Increase in electricity demand


Apply to KPLC to obtain a higher capacity transformer for the area to accommodate the new development within the national grid.


Firefighting


Firefighting equipment and trained personnel will be provided


Traffic increase and congestion


The development will provide for acceleration and de-acceleration lanes for traffic to and from the apartments.
The development should be serviced by two gates instead of one and provide dedicated entry and exist lanes.
The entrance to the development will be truncated to ensure that vehicles waiting to access the gate do not stop along the access road but within the truncation.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project. A copy of Environmental Assessment report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke and comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7769978         National Environment Management Authority.
 
 
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5781
STERN COMMERCIAL AGENCIES
Disposal of Uncollected Goods
NOTICE is given under the provisions of the Disposal of Uncollected Goods Act (Cap. 38) of the laws of Kenya to—
Francis Mutinda—(one colour  television set 21”);
Michael Otieno—(old fridge;
Gladys Njeri—(one old scrape motor vehicle);
Peter Waweru—(old sofa set, old carpet, coffee table, old bed and 3 water jericans);
Bernard Kihara—(one colour television set 14”);
Humphrey Mugo—(one colour television set 14”);
Michael Otieno—(one colour television set 21”);
Nicodemus Mwende—(one colour television set 14”;
Samuel Thuita—(one old bicycle);
Susan Mwangi—(one old fridge, one colour television set 14”;
Joseph Kuria—(one subwoofer music system);
that said household goods shall be sold/auctioned by Stern Commercial Agencies through Messrs. Lifewood Traders Auctioneers, to recover rent arrears and storage charges which have not been settled by the former tenants who left the goods in the custody of Stern Commercial Agencies as security for rent arrears which they owned us during their tenancy period in their residential premises, efforts trying to recover the areas from them have proven futile as we can not trace any of them either by phone or any other means. The said goods shall be sold/auctioned on 29th August, 2015, outside Pinkam House, Nakuru.
Conditions of sale:
(a) Sell will be by public auction as is where basis is.
(b) The highest bidder will be declared the purchaser.
(c)  Strictly cash at the fall of the hammer.
ZAPHANIA OMWAMBA,
MR/7769839                                for Stern Commercial Agencies.

