
				Page: 3042GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8017
THE COMPETITION ACT, 2010
(No. 12 of 2010)
EXCLUSIVE BOTTLING, MANUFACTURING AND DISTRIBUTORSHIP OF DISTELL LIMITED PRODUCTS BY KENYA WINE AGENCIES LIMITED
EXEMPTION
PURSUANT to provisions of section 25 of the Competition Act, 2010, the Competition Authority of Kenya wishes to notify the public that Kenya Wine Agencies Limited has made an application seeking exemption of the following proposed agreements (hereinafter referred to as “the Agreements”)-
(a)      an exclusive supply and distribution agreement between Distell Limited and Kenya Wine Agencies Limited;
 
(b)     an exclusive production and bottling agreement between Distell  Limited and  Kenya Wine Agencies Limited; and
(c)      exclusive distribution of selected Distell Limited Products by Kenya Wine Agencies Limited for a renewable period of five years.
Pursuant to the Agreements, Distell Limited shall acquire twenty-six percent (26%) of the issued share capital in Kenya Wine Agencies Holdings E. A. Limited subject to the following terms and conditions—
(i)       Kenya Wine Agencies Limited will be appointed by Distell Limited as the sole and exclusive distributor of selected liquor and non-liquor beverages in Kenya and the larger East African region;
 
(ii)     Kenya Wine Agencies Limited shall be appointed by Distell Limited as the sole and exclusive producer and bottler of selected Distell products in Kenya;
 
(iii)    Kenya Wine Agencies Limited shall not sell or distribute other liquor products originating from South Africa or elsewhere which directly or indirectly compete (as far as prices, category, or presentation is concerned) with the products in the Territories;
 
(iv)    the prices of all the products to be supplied to Kenya Wine Agencies Limited under the Agreements shall be determined by Distell Limited by the 1st June of each year for the following one-year period starting on the 1st July of each year;
 
(v)     Distell Limited shall be prohibited from soliciting for former customers and staff of KWA Holdings E.A. Limited or any of its affiliates after the completion date of the sale agreement and for a period of three (3) years from the date that Distell Limited ceases to have any direct or indirect shareholding in KWA Holdings E.A. Limited.
2.  All interested parties may submit any written representations, if any, with regard to this application within thirty (30) days of the publication of this notice.
3.  Submissions may be made through the email address—
info@cak.go.ke
or hand-delivered between 8.00 am–5.00pm during working days to—
The Competition Authority of Kenya,
Railways Headquarters,
Block ‘D’ Ground Floor,
Haile Selassie Avenue.
or through P. O. Box 36265 – 00200,
Nairobi.
Dated the 30th October, 2014.
WANG’OMBE KARIUKI,
Director-General.

