
				Page: 3067GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8134
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED AUGMENTATION AND REHABILITATION OF GATANGA WATER SUPPLY IN GATANGA SUB-COUNTY, MURANG’A COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Athi Water Services Board) is proposing to improve the water supply in Gatanga Sub-County by rehabilitating and expanding the water supply system in Gatanga Sub-County, Murang’a County.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


 Loss of vegetation


Retention of trees and shrubs, where possible on the potential sites for screening of the visual impact.
Where the proposed route requires the removal of any vegetation, care will be taken to minimize the destruction or damage of trees.
Re-planting of destroyed trees in cleared areas where works are complete.


Soil loss


Pile the top soil where it can be reused.
Program of Works should be prepared in line with Aberdare region weather pattern so as to avoid such works during rainy seasons.
Restrict disturbance to soil structure within project site.
Put measures for protection of soil erosion (berming of loss soil).
Installing necessary temporary and permanent drainage works.
Minimize excavations to only the designated sections.


Air quality issues


Provision should be made available for water sprays to be used when dusts are being generated or at times of strong wind.
All materials stored or stockpiled on site should be adequately covered.
Maintain machineries at manufacturers specifications.
Where unavoidable, construction workers working in dusty areas should be given dust masks.
Limit removal of vegetation and a rehabilitation programme on site and associated infrastructure following construction.


Noise pollution and vibrations


Use equipment that is properly fitted with noise reduction devices such as mufflers.
Use equipment that have low noise emissions as stated by the manufacturers.
Standard restrictions to hours of site works.
Workers should be provided with personal protective equipment.
The residents will be sensitized ahead of the commencement of works.


Generated wastes
 


A waste minimisation approach should be adopted as part of the construction works.
Skips and bins should be strategically placed within the campsite and construction site, they should also be adequately designed and covered to prevent access by vermin and minimize odour. They should also be emptied regularly.
Measures to ensure that waste materials from the Project are disposed at suitable sites will be taken. These will include engaging only reputable truckers and conducting appropriate spot checks to verify that disposal are done in accordance with the requirements of NEMA.
The ultimate fate of the wastes should be monitored so that they are not illegally disposed of.
Provide portable sanitary conveniences for the construction workers for control of sewage waste. A ratio of approximately 25 workers per chemical toilet should be used.


Visual impacts


Where the proposed route requires the removal of any vegetation, care will be taken to minimize the destruction or damage of trees.
Re-planting of trees will be done where appropriate or specifically stipulated by the relevant authorities such as KFS.


Potential impact of traffic


The site should have a Construction Traffic Management Plan.
Phasing of traffic movements to and from the site should be done so as to avoid potential convoys which could cause local scale congestion.
Trucks should not be over laden, and should be regularly serviced.
Good driving practices will be required from all delivery drivers.
Wherever and whenever construction approaches on the road or potentially affects the traffic signage will have to be placed and formal flagmen / women employed in order to ensure the public safety.
The contractor must ensure that the trucks carrying construction materials to the site are in good condition and no materials fall on the road as the truck moves around both on-site and off-site.
The contractor should ensure that the truck drivers adhere to and obey the speed limits.


Accidental spills or leakages


Maintain vehicles and machineries at manufacturers specifications.
Ensure proper storage of chemicals / materials.


Surface water run-off


During the course of the construction works, temporary drainage channels should be constructed to encourage dispersal of meteoric waters.
Storage and stockpiling of materials on the site should be away from drainage channels.
Backfill of trenches in or near drains should be topped with rock fill to stop scour where drains have a gradient of 5% or over.


Requirement and use of local building materials
 


Construction contract should stipulate that the Contractor sources materials from an approved site.
The tender documents should specify required standards and certification for procurement of all materials and appliances.
The sources of all required materials should be inspected prior to acquisition to confirm that they are legitimate operations.
The contractor should ensure that he sources construction materials sustainably.
The contractor should ensure that the storage area for materials is good so as to avoid spoils and waste.


Occupational health and safety risks


All construction workers should be advised of the dangers associated with construction work.
Workers should be provided with suitable foot wear, hard hats, protective glasses and generally with safety equipment where appropriate.
Provision of adequate sanitary facilities to workers.
Train all workers on  Safety Health and Environment (SHE) with an aim of improving awareness.
Trenches over 1.5 m deep or wherever soil conditions dictate should be shored and secured against accidental entry by public.
Install safety signage along the work areas.
Where construction activities interfere with the movement of traffic, the site should be signed and controlled by trained flagmen/flag women and lit by night.


Environmental pollution from gray water


Plans should be put in place by Gatanga Community Water and Sanitation Company on how to address sewer and waste water especially in fast growing markets like Gatura and Gatanga.


Impacts on drainage and hydrology


There should be due adherence to the safest maximum abstractable water quantities of throughout the project life.
Adhere to WRMA water use permits.


Solid waste generation and disposal


Provision of solid waste storage bins and skips.
Monitor skips so that they do not become overfilled.
Ensure that the solid waste collected is disposed of in an approved dumpsite.


Sludge management


Apply quicklime treatment to dewatered sludge in order to create a pathogen and odor free product.
Dry sludge on the drying beds before disposing off in a dedicated disposal site.
Preparation and enforcement of operational guidelines for sludge treatment / management.


Chemical handling


Improve chemical handling, avoid leakages and spillages.
Appropriate record keeping of data on chemicals and material safety data sheets.
Awareness creation amongst workers on proper handling of chemicals through training.


Emergency preparedness and response


Design and implement an emergency response plan.
Co-ordinate with aid organizations/agencies such as with the local fire brigade.
Install fire hydrants within the proposed development.
Install a fire extinguisher at the plant and train workers on how use.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Murang’a County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5951886         National Environment Management Authority.

