
				Page: 975GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3552
OFFICE OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT AND MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TASK FORCE TO DRAFT THE BILL ON THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS DETAINED, HELD IN CUSTODY OR IMPRISONED
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Vice-President and Minister for Home Affairs, for the purposes of drafting the Bill on the Rights of Persons Detained, Imprisoned or held in Custody, establishes a Task Force to be known as the Task Force to Draft the Bill on the Rights of Persons Detained, Imprisoned or held in custody.
1.  The Task Force shall comprise of the following—
Paul Musili Wambua (Dr.)—(Chairperson),
Titus Mwenda Karani—(Vice-Chairperson);
Members:
Fatuma Dullo.
Lucas Mwaura (Fr. Dr.).
Jones Mwanzia Kikuyu.
Janet Kotut.
Charles Kisembe.
Mary Kang’ethe.
Marlene A. Ayiro.
Mohamed Munyanya.
Ole Masi (Rev.).
Charles Obulutsa.
Everlyn Arisi.
Waikwa Wanyoike.
Grace Murungi.
Secretariat
Charles Kigotho.
Christine Ochieng.
Rose Komu.
2.  The Terms of Reference of the Task Force are to—
(a) Propose the Bill on the rights of persons detained or held in custody or imprisoned;
(b) Make provision for the proper care, protection of the rights of persons held in correctional institutions and places of detention;
(c) Collect and collate relevant information for the preparation of the draft legislation;
(d) Hold stakeholder workshops to discuss the Draft Bills;
(e) Make other appropriate recommendations on the rights of persons detained, held in custody or imprisoned.
3.  The Task Force shall be accountable to the Vice -President and Minister for Home Affairs to whom it shall make monthly progress reports and present a final report at the end of its term.
4.  The Task Force will—
(a) Regulate its own procedures and develop a work plan.
(b) Receive relevant information and documents that it requires.
5.  The quorum for any meeting for the purposes of conducting business other than to appoint a temporary chairman shall be seven (7) excluding the Chairman.
6.  Any member of the Task Force other than Public officers may resign in writing to the Minister and such resignation shall take effect upon such letter of resignation being received by the Minister.
7.  The costs incurred by the Task Force, shall be defrayed from the voted funds of the Ministry.
8.  The term of office of the Task Force shall be a period of four months commencing on the first day immediately following gazettement of the Task Force.
Dated the 31st March, 2011.
KALONZO MUSYOKA,
Vice-President and Minister for Home Affairs.

