
				Page: 975GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3554
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
EXTENSION OF THE TERM FOR THE TASK FORCE TO DEVELOP A MASTER PLAN FOR CONSERVATION OF WATER CATCHMENT AREAS
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Minister for Environment and Mineral Resources has extended the term for the Task Force to develop a Master Plan for conservation of Water catchment area.
The Task Force shall comprise the following:
Members:
Hassan Noor Hassan.
Esther Kathure Magambo.
Esther N. Ndirangu.
Henry Njuguna.
Zaverio N. Njeru.
Beatrice Manyonge.
Erastus W. Wahome.
Lornah Akoth Odero.
Anne Nyakihu Mukoma.
Fransica Wamboi.
Michael Gachanja.
Esther Muiruri.
Moses Imo (Prof.)
Joy Obando (Dr.).
Francis N. Gachathi.
Secretary:
Alice A. Kaudia (Dr.).
2.  Terms of reference of the Task Force are to—
(a) prepare a workplan for the Task Force activities;
(b)           Study existing legislation, policies and other relevant documents regarding the management of water catchment areas 
and identify any document gaps in the existing legislation, policies and other relevant documents;
(c) identify, map and document water catchment areas in the country including areas that have ceased to be catchment areas due to reasons to be identified by the Task Force;
(d) document the environmental status of each water catchment area;
(e) recommend appropriate intervention measures for each water catchment area;
(f)  prepare an action plan for implementation of the recommendations;
(g) draft a master plan for the sustainable management of the water catchment areas;
(h) identify potential sources of resources, both financial and human for undertaking the recommended interventions;
(i)  elect its chairperson; and
(j)  identify and co-opt other members or any other resources provided that the co-opted members do not exceed one-third of the Task Force.
3.  The Secretariat of the Task Force shall be situated at the National Hospital Insurance Fund Building, 12th Floor, Nairobi.
4.  The term of the task force shall be a period of six (6) month with effect from 16th March, 2011.
Dated the 21st March, 2011.
J. N. MICHUKI,
                          Minister for Environment and Mineral Resources.

