
				Page: 974GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3550
OFFICE OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT AND MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TASK FORCE TO DRAFT THE VICTIMS OF OFFENCES BILL AND THE BAIL INFORMATION AND SUPERVISION BILL
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Vice-President and Minister for Home Affairs, for the purposes of drafting the Bill on the Victims of Offences Bill and the Bail Information and Supervision Bill, establishes a Task Force to be known as the Task Force to Draft the Victims of Offences Bill and the Bail Information and Supervision Bill.
1   The Task Force shall comprise of the following—
Dorcas Kitaa Shikuku—(Chairperson),
Charles Wanyoike—(Vice-Chairperson);
Members:
John Makau.
Elecah M. Mbithi.
Kennedy Nyagudi.
Josephine Muthami.
Amina Abdallah.
Nicholas Mulila.
Josephat Ituka.
Kennedy Odipo.
Rhoda Amulele-Ogoma.
Paul K. Gachiri.
Stephen N. Mbungi.
Bishop Chabuga.
Peter Maundu.
Secretariat:
John Bii.
Carole Atieno.
Moses Mabonga.
2.  The Terms of Reference of the Task Force are to—
(a) Propose the Victim of offences Bill.
(b) Propose the Bail Information and Supervision Bill.
(c) Propose structures, processes and regulations for the protection of the rights of victims of offences and provision of psycho-social support services.
(d) Make provision for the generation and use of Bail information for the Supervision of persons admitted to bail where required.
(e) Collect and collate information necessary for the development of the two legislations.
(f)  Hold stakeholder workshops to validate the Draft Bills.
(g) Make other appropriate recommendations for the fulfillment of the objectives of the task force.
3.  The Task Force shall be accountable to the Vice-President and Minister for Home Affairs to whom it shall make monthly progress reports and present a final report at the end of its term.
4.  The Task Force will—
(a) Regulate its own procedures and develop a work plan.
(b) Receive relevant information and documents that it requires.
(c) Seek assistance from a consultant as it may deem appropriate.
5.  The quorum for any meeting for the purposes of conducting business other than to appoint a temporary chairman shall be seven (7) excluding the Chairman.
6.  Any member of the Task Force other than Public officers may resign in writing to the Minister and such resignation shall take effect upon such letter of resignation being received by the Minister.
7.  The costs incurred by the Task Force, shall be defrayed from the voted funds of the Ministry.
8   The term of office of the Task Force shall be a period of four months commencing on the first day immediately following gazettement of the Task Force.
Dated the 31st March, 2011.
KALONZO MUSYOKA,
Vice-President and Minister for Home Affairs.

