
				Page: 1044GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3506
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED DEMOLITION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF LAMU CUSTOMS JETTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed demolition and reconstruction of the Lamu Customs Jetty.
The proposed project involves three phase’s namely planning, demolition, reconstruction and operation of the jetty.
The proposed demolition, construction and civil works and later on, subsequent operation of the jetty will be located on the Lamu waterfront.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


Soil erosion


Control earthworks.
Install drainage structures properly.
Ensure management of excavation activities.


Air pollution


Stockpiles of earth should be sprayed with water or cover during dry seasons.
Provide dust masks for the personnel in dust generation areas.
Sensitize construction workers.


Noise pollution


Sensitize workforce including operators of construction machines.
Install sound barriers for pile driving activity.
Install portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationary equipment where necessary.
Put up signs to indicate construction activities.
Maintain all equipments.
Workers in the vicinity of high level noise to wear safety and protective gear.


Dust generation


Spray stock piles of earth with water.
Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand and other loose materials.
Provide dust screen where necessary.


Exhaust emissions


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized.
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible.
Equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.


Water sources


Management of water usage. Avoid unnecessary wastage of water.
Avail storage tanks.
Harvesting of rain water.


Site cleanliness and sanitary facilities


Special attention shall be paid to the sanitary facilities on site.
Garbage shall be disposed off periodically.


Road safety


Road signs on main roads.
Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles.


Public health and occupational safety


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Proper handling and disposal of solid waste.
Provide suitable safety gear for all personnel.


Biodiversity impact


Non drilling of the sand dunes if found on site.
Flora: very limited; moved if encountered Fauna.
Best construction and drilling methods will be applied to avoid disturbance.
Appropriate design and construction of the jetty. Regular monitoring.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Coast Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Lamu District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1662219          National Environment Management Authority.

