
				Page: 2041GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5391
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED FUEL STATION ON ALMAGATED LAND PARCEL NOS. 163B, 166,150 AND 120, KATANGI TOWN, MACHAKOS COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Nancy Mwende Kangata) is proposing to a Fuel Station on Almagated Land Parcel Nos. 163b, 166,150 & 120 off Kitui-Machakos-Nairobi road,Katangi town, Katangi Ward, Yatta Constituency, Machakos County
 The development will include ground preparation, installation of petrol pumps, underground oil storage tanks, construction of a supermarket, lube service bay, office and washrooms and installation of service lines as well as the utilities required for the station and supermarket use such as water lines, power lines, sewer lines, solid waste disposal among others
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Occupation healthand safety risks


Development of Health and safety plan.
Workers to be provided with protective gear.


Exposure to risky equipment


Create health and safety awareness among all workers.
Provide workers with appropriate working gears.


Soil erosion
 


Control earthworks.
Install drainage structures properly
Ensure management of extraction activities.
Landscaping.


Air pollution
 


Stockpiles of earth shall be sprayed with water or covered during dry seasons.
Provide dust masks for the personnel in dust generation areas.
Sensitize construction workers.


Noise pollution
 


Sensitize workforce including drivers of construction vehicles.
Put up signs to indicate construction activities.
Maintain all equipments.
Workers in the vicinity of high level noise to wear safety and protective gear.


Dust generation
 


Spray stock piles of earth with water.
Avoid pouring dust materials from elevated areas to the ground.
Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand, and other loose materials.
Provide dust screens where necessary.

 

Excess soils and rocks from excavation


This will be used in landscaping the disturbed site after construction destruction of vegetation.


Clearance of vegetation


Plant a diversity of plants (ornamental and indigenous) around the buildings once the project is complete.

 

 


Limit vegetation clearance on mandatory areas only during construction phase.
During construction phase, limit traffic to designated routes only to avoid unwarranted.


Exhaust emissions
 


Vehicle and machines idling shall be minimised.
Alternatively fuelled construction and petrol station and supermarket machines/equipment shall be used where feasible.
Equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.


Water sources
 


Carry out initial water quality test
Management of water usage. Avoid unnecessary wastage of water.
Install automatic water conserving  taps and toilets.
Avail water storage tanks.
Harvesting of rain water.
Water recycling.
Connect to the septic tanks to dispose off the waste water.


Site cleanliness and sanitary facilities, Solid wastes, road safety


Special attention to sanitary facilities on site.
Garbage shall be disposed off periodically.
Road signs on main roads.
Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles.


Fire outbreak


The proponent shall ensure that the completed petrol station and supermarket is fitted with safety facilities including fire fighting equipments and fire exits.
Install smoke detectors.
Put fire extinguishers at strategic sites during, operation and decommissioning.
Ensure adequate water stocks and operational pressures for fire fighting during operation.
Post warning ‘NO SMOKING’ signs at fire prone areas.
Mount safety signs to indicate the emergency exits and restricted areas.


Increased energy consumption


Put off electric machines when not in use.
Use high energy saving bulbs.
Install a solar power panel.


Influx of people into the area


Screen petrol station and supermarket workers and suppliers.
Give first priority to the locals in employment opportunities.
Provide 24-hour security guards.


Traffic alteration and accidents
 


Strictly label drive ways as “IN and OUT”.
Indicate speed limit within the premises.
Ensure enough parking space for clients at the petrol station and supermarket.


Noncompliance to environmental and other requirements self auditing of environmental health and safety concerns


Set up self audit teams.
Conduct scheduled self audits every 6 months.
Conduct annual environmental self audits and submit report to NEMA.
Undertake corrective and preventive actions and recommended improvements.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Wajir County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
KODIA D. BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/5678669              National Environment Management Authority.

