
				Page: 1982GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5440
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT
(No. 18 of 2012)
The Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (Psasb) Financial Reporting and Internal Auditing Standards PRONOUNCEMENT
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred under section 194 (1) (f) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012, the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury in consultation with the Public Sector Accounting Standard Board Gazettes the following dates for application of the Standards and guidelines—
1.0     Introduction
1.1     The Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (PSASB) was established by the Public Finance Management Act (PFM) No. 18 of 24th July, 2012. The Board was gazetted by the Cabinet Secretary, National Treasury on 28th February, 2014.
1.2     The Board is mandated to provide frameworks and set generally accepted standards for the development and management of accounting and financial systems by all state organs and public entities, and shall in particular perform the following functions:—
(a)     Set generally accepted accounting and financial standards.
(b)     Prescribe the minimum standards of maintenance of proper books of account for all government.
(c)      Prescribe internal audit procedures which comply with the Public Finance Management Act.
(d)     Prescribe formats for financial statements and reporting by all state organs and public entities.
(e)      Publish and publicize the accounting and financial standards and any directive and guidelines prescribed by the Board.
(f)       In consultation with the Cabinet Secretary on the effective dates of implementation of these standards, gazette the dates for application of the standards and guidelines.
(g)     Perform any other functions related to advancing financial and accounting systems management and reporting in the public sector.
1.3   In exercising this mandate, the board hereby issues the financial reporting and internal auditing standards to be applied by all state organs and public sector entities. These standards are intended to enhance quality of financial reports and improve compliance with internal controls in all state organs and public sector entities.
2.0      Financial Reporting Standards
2.1      The Board has approved for adoption:-
2.1.1   The International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) issued by the International Accounting Standards Board for application by State Corporations.
2.1.2   The International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) issued by the International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (IPSASB) for application by all public sector entities except the State Corporations.
2.2      The Board has approved application of these standards as follows:
2.2.1   The National and County government and their respective entities shall apply IPSAS cash based standard
2.2.2   The Semi-Autonomous National County Government Agencies shall apply IPSAS Accrual based standards.
2.2.3   The state and County Corporations carrying out commercial activities shall apply IFRS while regulatory and non-commercial State and County Corporations shall apply IPSAS Accrual
2.3      The Board shall periodically review and prescribe the applicable financial reporting standards, which shall include progressive application of IPSAS Accrual standards by National and County Governments and their respective entities.
3.0      Internal Auditing Standards
3.1      The Board has approved for adoption and application of the International Professional Practice Framework (IPPF) for internal Auditing Standards by the Institute of Internal Auditors by all state organs and public sector entities.
4.0      Effective Date of adoption and application of the standards
4.1      The standards specified in 2.1 and 2.2 and in 3.1 shall be adopted and applied with effect from the 1st July 2014
5.0      Implementation Guidelines
5.1      The Board shall provide guidelines for the application of the standards
5.2      The above mentioned applicable financial reporting and internal auditing standards, and implementation guidelines will be availed n the treasury website.
Dated the 8th July, 2014.
HENRY K.ROTICH,
Cabinet Secretary, National Treasury.
 

