
				Page: 2045GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5510
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MENENGAI ROLLLING MILLS ON LAND REFERENCE NO. DAGORETTI/KINOO 4835 IN KINOO DIVISION, MUTHIGA LOCATION, KIAMBU COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Menengai Stores Limited) intends to establish a Sufuria (cooking pot) and wick production plant in Muthiga location, Kinoo Division, on plot L.R No DAGORRETTI/KINOO/4835, in Kiambu County.
The proponent intends to construct godowns and aluminum-based factory for manufacturing of cooking pots, popularly known as ‘Sufuria’, from aluminium metal ingots. The premises will also be used for the production of lamp and cook-stove wicks.  The godowns will be used for storage of raw materials and finished goods.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Metal dust during preparation for smelting


Do not use drills & grinders or any power tools
All workers on the production line MUST wear Personal Protective Equipment at all times
Do not water blast or scrub with a stiff broom. Only use a manually controlled low pressure course garden horse


Metal dust/ fibres during transportation


All vehicles transporting scrap metal should be covered
All workers involved in the loading and offloading should wear PPE’s


Stack, Grid  and tailpipe emissions


A 35 meter stack will be used
Wet scrubbing of gases from the furnace to be employed so as to avert emission of NOx and SOx
Removal of dust and particulate matter through cyclones and fabric filters
Conduct Energy and Environmental audits to ascertain emission impacts
Contribute to environmental protection activities such as tree planting that help sequester emitted carbon dioxide
Ensure that company vehicles are well serviced to reduce tailpipe emissions
Adhere to NEMA air quality regulations


Oil leaks and spills


Use well serviced vehicles and machinery
Provide adequate servicing of vehicles and machinery on site.
Proper storage of petroleum products.


Noise and vibration


Usage of manual labour as much as possible.
Avoid use of explosives in construction works.
Avoid unnecessary hooting of vehicles.
Ensure all generators and heavy machinery are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize noise levels.


Increased water demand


Water for cooling & rolling is re-cycled throughout the process without release. The volumes are only lost due to evaporation.
Connection to city council water supply line.
Buildings to have roof rainwater harvesting and storage facilities.
Sinking of boreholes to complement city council water supply.
Detect and repair water pipes.
Install water conservation taps that turn off automatically when water is not in use.


Increased waste water generation


Waste water from the production line must be treated in accordance with proper industry standards
Waste water shall not be released into the environment before treatment
Conduct regular laboratory checks to ascertain the levels of heavy metals in waste water
Strictly adhere to NEMA water quality regulations of 2006


Increased solid waste proliferation


All wastes to be disposed at designated disposal sites/landfills
Re-use or recycle packaging materials such as paper cartons, plastic containers and bags.
Provide collection containers especially hospital or laboratory wastes (different colours to allow waste segregation) at designated points on site.
Provide waste cubicles and Contract NEMA licensed private waste handlers.
All metal cuttings and waste to be recycled


Increased vehicular traffic


Provide paved local access road networks.
Provide direct road access to Main road.
Provide adequate vehicle parking space.


Increased energy demand


Connection to main power line.
Provide solar lighting and water heating systems.
Installation of standby generators.
Provide energy saving (low power consumption) lighting bulbs.


Worker accidents and health risks


Employ skilled workers.
Train workers on safety issues.
Prepare clear work schedules and procedures.
Have a clear organizational plan at the site with an occupational, health and safety officer.
Provision of personal protection equipment.
Provide onsite training.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692276              National Environment Management Authority.

