
				Page: 2006GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5506
THE COMMISSION FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
QUARTERLY PROGRESS REPORT APRIL TO JUNE 2013
FOREWORD
 
I take this opportunity to once again present the CIC quarterly progress report for the period April- June 2013. Activities in this report were undertaken at a time when Kenya was transitioning from a centralized sys- tem of government to a devolved system of government. Like all new ambitious projects, transition to devolved system of government faced a number of teething challenges.
Cognizant of the challenges experienced in the formative stages of the commencement of county governments, the Commission convened high-level meetings, first with senators and then with governors to discuss issues affecting transition to devolved system of government and how the senators and governors can effectively play their role to facilitate a smooth transition. The Commission also attended a meeting with speakers of the National Assembly and the Senate, the Office of the Attorney General and the Kenya Law Reform Commission. The meeting considered and agreed on a formula for processing legislation. The consensus building meetings established a framework of working with the new offices and incoming state officers in a consultative and coordinated manner.
On the legislative front, the Commission facilitated the development of legislation required to be enacted by 27th August 2013 and forwarded the same to the Attorney General for publication. The Commission also audited laws enacted by the 10th Parliament for compliance with the Constitution. Audit of legislation should be a continuous exercise by all Kenyans to ensure that our laws reflect the will of the people as enshrined in the Constitution.
Effective implementation of devolved system of government requires a review of all existing policies to entrench devolution. At the moment, a comprehensive review of existing policies has not yet been achieved. This poses a challenge to the implementation of the devolved system of government. The Commission notes with concern that lack of policies could under- mine the implementation of the devolved system of government. The Commission is ready to support identification and review and/or development of such policies.
The coming into place of county governments and a restructured national executive called for new strategic thinking at the Commission resulting in a revised strategic plan that comprehensively addresses transition to devolved governments.
At this point on my own behalf and on behalf of members of the Commission, I acknowledge and express my gratitude to our team of dedicated staff, the people of Kenya and our stakeholders who shared their views and technical expertise with the Commission, state and public officers in county and national governments for the cooperation and support and our development partners for their support. As we forge ahead in the implementation of the Constitution, I call upon all Kenyans to remain vigilant and all the friends of Kenya to continue supporting the Constitution implementation process.
CHARLES NYACHAE,
Chairperson
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 
This progress report covers the period of April to June, 2013, which follows the March 4th General Elections and coincides with the beginning of Phase Two[1] of the transition to the devolved system of government, which has four key activities:
(a)      Complete any activity that may be outstanding from Phase One;
(b)     Oversee the transfer of functions from the national government to the county governments;
(c)      Facilitate the county governments in the performance of their functions;
(d)     Any other activity that may be necessary to enable county governments carry out their functions.
Carrying out its mandate as spelt out in the Constitution and the CIC Act, 2010, the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution the Commission undertook various activities in facilitating and monitoring the implementation of the Constitution, including review of polices, review of legislation, engagement with Ministries to develop administrative procedures, completion of the CIC strategic Plan, 2013–2015, and analysis of progress reports from Ministries and state agencies. Much effort during the quarter went into ensuring that the process of transition to the devolved system of government was implemented as stipulated in the Constitution.
Among the policies that the Commission engaged in developing are: The Policy on Languages of Kenya and Local Languages, which provides direction on the promotion and use of indigenous languages; Kenya Sign Language and Braille; The National Registration, Identification and Refugees Policy, and; Labour and Social Security Policies, including; Industrial Training Policy, Occupational Safety and Health Policy, Social Protection Policy, Productivity Policy, and Employment Policy. Child Labour Policies are planned for development by end of 2013.
 
The Medium Term Plan II (2013-2017) is a policy document that sets out the road map towards realization of the Kenya Vision 2030 and implementation of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. The Commission continued to engage with the Ministry of Devolution and Planning to mainstream a constitutional focus in the MTP II and development of monitoring and evaluation frameworks and tools to ensure inclusion of indicators for constitutional implementation.
The Commission worked with Government Ministries and other stakeholders to facilitate the development and review of legislation. The Commission undertook an audit of laws enacted by the 10th Parliament and particularly those that were not processed through CIC to ensure compliance with the letter and spirit of the Constitution.
Among the Bills reviewed during the quarter are: The National Coroner Service Bill; The Private Security Industry Regulation Bill; The National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill and National Police Service (Amendment) Bill); The Mining Bill, 2013; The Contempt of Court and Magistrates’ Courts Bills, 2013; Work Injuries Compensation Bill, 2013a, and; The Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2011.
Administrative procedures, regulations and institutional frameworks are required to implement the Acts of Parliament. The Commission worked with Ministries and State organs under the Executive and Security Thematic Area to develop regulations to effect security-related Acts of Parliament, including the Kenya Defence Forces Act. The Kenya Defence Forces and the Ministry of Defence submitted 15 sets of regulations in compliance with section 304 of the Act. Other Acts that require regulations are the:  National Intelligence Service Act, 2012; National Government Coordination Act; National Security Council Act; National Police Service Act; National Intelligence Service Act, and; National Police Service Act.
Understanding public finance in the counties is a critical tenet for the successful implementation of the devolved system of government. The Commission developed a publication handbook, “50 Things Every Kenyan Needs to Know About Public Finance” to enhance understanding of public finance under both the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act (2012). The Commission also finalized a Simplified Version of Chapter Five of the Constitution to demystify Land and Environment issues in the Constitution.
 
Section 15(2) (d) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution mandates the Commission to monitor the effective implementation of the devolved system of government. Section 4(a) (iii) and (iv) to the same schedule requires the Commission to report on:
The process of establishing the infrastructure necessary for the proper operation of each county, including progress on locating offices and assemblies and establishment and transfer of staff;
The devolution of powers and functions to the counties under the legislation contemplated in section 15 of the Schedule.
In this quarter, CIC engaged various stakeholders to ensure effective implementation of the devolved system of government, sustaining the agenda in national discussions, consultations, advisories, trainings and diverse public engagement forums. Advisories on the transition and consultative meetings set the pace for devolution after the general elections. The two forums with the Senators and Governors expounded on their roles and responsibilities in the implementation of the devolved system of government.
Implementation of the Constitution, especially the devolved system of government continued to face challenges. The notable ones include incomplete Phase One transition activities, for example, functional analysis, which has affected the transfer of functions to county governments. The executive is yet to identify and develop policies to facilitate devolution. Equally, Parliament (Senate and National Assembly) has not aggressively moved to identify legislation that hinder devolution and amend/develop such legislation to facilitate the devolved system of government as envisaged in the Constitution.
Fights for supremacy between the Senate and National Assembly on one hand and County Executives and County Assemblies on the other witnessed during the reporting period have slowed down the devolution momentum. There is an urgent need to develop working mechanisms between the two levels of government, the two houses of Parliament and between county executives and assemblies.
The Commission issued advisories on various subjects concerning implementation of the Constitution, including: Transfer of Functions from the National to County Governments; the Role of Senate in Revenue Bills and on Salaries of MPs, and in the Salaries of Members of Parliament as Set by The Salaries and Remuneration Commission; Legislative Process of the Division of Revenue Bill as well as advising on the supremacy debate between the National Assembly and the Senate. Other advisories were on the Resolution by the National Assembly Regarding the Setting of Remuneration and Benefits of State Officers, and the unconstitutionality of the Constituencies Development Fund (CDF) Act, 2013.
PART ONE
 
INTRODUCTION
1.1     Mandate of the Commission
 
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (‘the Commission’) is established under Section 5(1) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. The mandate of the Commission is stipulated in Section 4(a), 5(6), and 15(d) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution Act, 2010 and the Transition to Devolved Government Act.  The functions of the Commission are to:
(a)      Monitor, facilitate and oversee the development of legislation and administrative procedures required to implement the Constitution;
(b)     Co-ordinate with the Attorney-General and the Kenya Law Reform Commission in preparing for tabling in Parliament, the legislation required to implement the Constitution;
(c)      Report every three (3) months to the Constitutional Implementation Oversight Committee on:
(i)       Progress in the implementation of the Constitution;
(ii)     The preparation of the legislation required by the Constitution and any challenges in that regard;
(iii)    The process of establishing new commissions;
(iv)    Any impediments to the process of implementing the Constitution;
(d)     Work with each Constitutional Commission to ensure that the letter and spirit of the Constitution is respected;
(e)      Exercise such other functions as are provided for by the Constitution or any other written law, and;
(f)      Monitor and oversee the transition process to devolved government and ensure that the system of devolved government is implemented effectively.
1.2     Reporting Requirements of the Commission
 
The Commission is required by law to regularly report on the progress in the implementation of the Constitution. This requirement is amplified in Section 4 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and Sections 4, 25 and 26 of CIC Act. The relevant provisions are reproduced below. Full contents of such reports are contained in respective sections.
(1)     Section 4(a) of the Sixth Schedule: There shall be a select committee of Parliament to be known as the Constitutional Implementation Oversight Committee which shall be responsible for overseeing the implementation of this Constitution and which, among other things—
Shall receive regular reports from the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution on the implementation of this Constitution.
(2)     CIC Act, 2010
Section 4 (d); report at least once every three months to the Parliamentary Select Committee on:
(i) The progress in the implementation of the Constitution; and
(ii) Any impediments to the implementation of the Constitution.
b   Section 25.
(1) The Commission shall prepare a progress report every three months and submit the report to the Parliamentary Select Committee and the President.
(2) The progress report shall—
                  (a)        State the progress in the implementation of the Constitution;
                  (a)        Identify any impediments to the implementation of the Constitution;
                  (a)        Recommend any legal and administrative measures to address specific concerns identified by the Commission; and
                  (a)        State any other information relating to its function that the Commission considers necessary.
(3) The Commission shall publish the report in the Gazette and in such other manner as the Commission may determine.
(c)  Section 26.
(1) The Commission shall cause an annual report to be prepared for each financial year.
(2) The Commission shall submit the annual report to the President and Parliament within three months after the end of the year to which it relates.
The Commission is further obligated to meet the objects of Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices as set out in Article 249 (1) of the Constitution, which are:
(a)      Protecting the sovereignty of the people;
(b)     Securing the observance by all State organs of democratic values and principles; and
(c)      Promoting constitutionalism.
In discharging its mandate, the Commission is obliged to observe, promote, respect and protect national values and principles of governance as stipulated in Article 10 of the Constitution.
 
1.3   Mission and Vision of the Commission
 
Vision: A united and prosperous Kenya, in which everyone respects, upholds and defends the Constitution.
Mission: To ensure policies, laws, administrative procedures and institutional frameworks are consistent with the letter and the spirit of the Constitution.
 
1.4     Organization of the Report
 
This report is divided into Seven Parts and Four Annexes. This Introduction Part summarizes the Commission’s mandate, including its reporting requirements. It also lists the Commission’s vision and mission derived from its Strategic Plan, 2013-2015. Part Two provides analysis of the Commission’s achievements during the reporting period under the subheadings of policies, legislation and administrative procedures reviewed, indicating the status of each.
Part Three focuses on the Devolved System of Government. It highlights the work of CIC around devolution and the Commission’s engagement with various stakeholders to ensure effective implementation of the devolved system of government, sustaining the agenda in national discussions, consultations, advisories, trainings and public engagement. Part Four discusses media engagement and public advisories, while Part Five discusses stakeholder engagements.
Part Six provides a summary of litigation the Commission was involved in, giving an account of those cases that have been concluded and those that are still pending. Part Seven provides a summary of activities planned for the July-September 2013 quarter.
Finally, the report has four annexes. Annex One provides action points from meetings with senators and governors. Annex Two contains status updates of enactment of required legislation, policies and administrative procedures to operationalize the Constitution. Annex Three is a list of legislation enacted after the promulgation of the Constitution, and Annex Four provides advisories issued by the Commission on various subjects concerning the implementation of the Constitution.
PART TWO
 
ACHIEVEMENTS
 
During the reporting period (April–June 2013), the Commission undertook various activities in facilitating and monitoring the implementation of the Constitution, including review of polices and legislation for their alignment with the Constitution, engagement with Ministries to develop administrative procedures, completion of the CIC strategic Plan, 2013–2015, and analysis of progress reports from Ministries and state agencies. Other activities included county visits to assess county preparedness for devolution. The sections below provide a summary of these achievements.
 
2.1   Review and Development of Polices
 
Development of policies set the foundation upon which legislation is anchored. The Commission has continued to advise and support review of national policies to guide development of legislation and administrative procedures. During the reporting period, the Commission engaged with Ministries, departments and state agencies in review and development of the following policies.
 
2.1.1   Policy on Languages of Kenya and Local Languages
 
The Fourth Schedule to the Constitution invests on  the National Government the mandate of developing the Languages Policy and the promotion of official and local languages. The Ministry of Culture, Sports and Arts is currently developing the Languages of Kenya Policy and a Bill to give effect to Articles 7 and 44 of the Constitution. The Commission participated at a stakeholder workshop held by the Ministry on 22nd–23rd May 2013 at the Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD) to review the documents. The Commission’s key role was to provide technical advice and assist in finalization of the Policy and Bill. Among the key issues arising from the meeting was the need to:
 
(a)      Ensure effective public participation representing diverse interests and communities since the Policy and the Bill seek to promote the development and use of indigenous languages.
(b)     Ensure that the Policy provides direction on promotion and use of indigenous languages, Kenya Sign Language and Braille.
(c)      Provide clarity on the role of the Counties in ensuring effective implementation of Articles 7 and 44 of the Constitution.
(d)     Provide clarity on the role of the Kenya Languages Council to ensure its functions do not conflict with those of the Ministry.
(e)      Ensure definition of key terminologies including “official communication”.
 
2.1.2    The National Registration, Identification and Refugees Policy
 
This is among the policies under review by CIC. Within the reporting quarter, CIC held a meeting with the Kenya Foreign Citizens and Foreign Nationals Management Service Board on the review of the National Registration and Identification Bill 2012 and Refugees Bill 2012. As a way forward, it was agreed that the Policy would be reviewed alongside the Bills and forwarded to CIC for audit.
 
2.1.3    Labour and Social Security Policies
 
The Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services forwarded to CIC the Policies under review and those set to be reviewed during the 2013-2014 financial year. The policies fall under the following categories.
(1)     Policies that have been reviewed by the Ministry for consistency with the Constitution.
(a)     Industrial Training Policy
(b)     Occupational Safety and Health Policy
(c)      Social Protection Policy
(d)     Productivity Policy
(e)      Employment Policy
 
(2)     Policies to be reviewed/developed by end of 2013
(a)     Child Labour Policies
 
The Commission will engage the services of a consultant to facilitate effective review of these policies, which will also involve effective public participation.
 
2.1.4    The Medium Term Plan II (2013-2017)
 
The Government is finalizing the Medium Term Plan II (2013-2017), a policy document that sets out the road map towards realization of the Kenya Vision 2030 and the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. The Commission continued to participate in the stakeholder forums as well as engage with the Ministry of Devolution and Planning to mainstream a constitutional focus in the content as well as the MTP development process. During the previous quarters the Commission had engaged with the then Ministry of Planning and National Development, the National Stakeholders Forum as well as some of the Sector Working Groups to inform the development process. From the various inputs received, a draft was developed and circulated to CIC, among other stakeholders, for continued input.
During this quarter, among the notable achievements realized include a robust engagement of both state and non-state actors including at the grassroots level, progress towards mainstreaming a citizen-centered and values-driven approach in all sectors across the political, social, economic and enabling pillars of the plan. Further, the Commission is participating in the development of a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework for MTP II to ensure inclusion of indicators for constitutional implementation. The Commission is also participating in the development of an M&E policy to guide state actors in developing their M&E functions, especially those related to the implementation of the Constitution. 
The Commission will continue to work with the relevant stakeholders during the finalization of MTP II to address emerging concerns to ensure (i) a process that respects and engages the two levels of government, (ii) a more holistic focus in the results as well as in the program and project definition to capture the required legislative, policy and institutional reforms for constitutional compliance in all sectors, and (iii)  that MTP II adequately captures the building blocks required during the three year transition to devolved system of government as stipulated in the Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2011.
2.2     Development of Legislation
 
The Commission worked with Government Ministries and other stakeholders to facilitate the development and review of legislation according to the procedure for development of legislation agreed to between the Kenya Law Reform Commission (KLRC), Office of the Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, National Cohesion and Constitutional Affairs (MoJNCCA) and the Committee on the Implementation of the Constitution (CIOC). The procedure requires Ministries to originate Bills, which are then drafted with the assistance of the Attorney General and the Kenya Law Reform Commission. Thereafter, the Bills are submitted to CIC for review in accordance with Article 261(1) and (4) of the Constitution[2].
 
2.2.1Audit of Laws Enacted by the 10th Parliament
 
The Commission undertook an audit of laws enacted by the 10th Parliament and particularly those that were not processed through CIC (see Annex 2) to ensure compliance with the letter and spirit of the Constitution. Once finalized, the audit will form the basis for engagement with the legislators and the executive to facilitate the review of laws to ensure compliance with the Constitution. Key concerns arising from the audit are:
 
(a)  The role of parastatals versus devolved structure of Government. For example, The National Authority for the Campaign Against Alcohol and Drug Abuse Act, 2012 establishes the National Authority for the Campaign Against Alcohol and Drug Abuse mandated to undertake the functions assigned to the County Government by the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution.
 
(b) The need to ensure that the functions of the County Government are not usurped by the National Government and the need to establish an intergovernmental mechanism where necessary. An example of this is the Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (KEMSA) established under the Kenya Medical Supplies Authority Act 2012, as a national body, to undertake the function of procurement of drugs. Although the procurement of drugs has in the past been undertaken by KEMSA, the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution gives the role of procurement of drugs to County Governments while retaining only the setting of standards as a National Government function. There is therefore need for dialogue between the National and County governments to put in place an intergovernmental mechanism that will facilitate seamless transition in the procurement of drugs.
(c)  The Act should give effect to the provisions of the Constitution. Acts of Parliament are developed to implement the Constitution. For example, the Consumer Protection Act, 2012 is intended to give effect to Article 46 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. However, although this Act addresses sub-articles 46(a) and (b), it does not adequately, if at all, address sub-articles 46(c) and (d). Further the Act is heavily focused on protection of consumers in specific sectors including motor vehicle repair and credit agreements, where advance fees are prohibited and the civil aviation sector to the exclusion of others such as insurance, financial services, microfinance, retirement benefits, capital markets, public service, education and training, agriculture and information services, health and food manufacturing industries, among others. Note that the Consumer referred to in article 46 is everybody and in all sectors. The Act should therefore adequately address the rights and protection measures of all consumers in all sectors.
 
2.2.2    The National Coroner Service Bill
 
The National Coroner Service Bill and Private Security Industry Regulation Bill are prioritized for enactment by August 26th 2013. In April, the Commission held a consultative meeting with Government Pathologists from all 47 Counties, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Internal Security and Provincial Administration, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Office of the Attorney General, the Office of the Inspector-General, Kenya Police Service, Administration Police Service, Directorate of Criminal Investigations, and civil society organizations to discuss the National Coroner Service Bill. This meeting significantly improved the Bill, which which is in the final stages and currently undergoing internal review in CIC for finalization and submission to the office of the Attorney-General.
 
2.2.3    The Private Security Industry Regulation Bill
 
During the month of May, the Commission held a consultative meeting with private security companies to give them an opportunity to give an input into the Private Security Industry Regulation Bill, which seeks to regulate the private security industry. The meeting noted an urgent need to enact security laws due to the raft of security challenges currently facing the country and the role played by the private security companies in providing and maintaining security. The Commission, with the assistance of the UNDP, engaged a consultant to support the review of the Bill and to generate proposals for its alignment  with the letter and spirit of the Constitution and international best practice.
 
2.2.4    The National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill and National Police Service (Amendment) Bill
 
The Commission received the National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill and National Police Service (Amendment) Bill, for review. The two Bills were generated by the Ministry of State for Provincial Administration and Internal Security and forwarded to the Commission in accordance with the agreed process for reviewing Bills required to implement the Constitution. The National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill amends the National Police Service Commission Act, No. 30 of 2011 to ensure full implementation of Article 246 of the Constitution, while the National Police Service (Amendment) Bill amends the National Police Service Act, No. 11A of 2011 to ensure full implementation of Article 245 of the Constitution.
2.2.5The Mining Bill, 2013
 
During the January-March quarter, the Commission received the Geology, Minerals and Mining Bill, 2012 and subjected the same to internal and stakeholder review. However, the Commission learnt that the Bill was yet to be published without the Commission’s input being addressed. In the current quarter, the Commission has continued to follow up on the Mining Bill. The newly-formed Ministry of Mining conducted a two-day stakeholder’s meeting in which the Commission participated. The Cabinet Secretary for Mining attended the meeting where the stakeholders deliberated and agreed on a range of issues in the Bill, including mineral rights on community land, Government participation in the granting of mining licenses, sharing of royalties and renaming the Bill from the Geology, Minerals and Mining Bill to the Mining Bill.
Subsequently, the Commission conducted a two-day plenary on the Bill, reviewed it and made additional changes to improve it. This led to a roundtable meeting with the Attorney General’s Office, Kenya Law Reform Commission and the Ministry of Mining where the Cabinet Secretary was also present. The roundtable resolved the main issues with the relevant parties and agreed on a final Bill.
2.2.6The Contempt of Court and Magistrates’ Courts Bills, 2013
 
The Commission finalized review of these Bills and submitted them to the Attorney General for publication following a roundtable meeting, which was held on 2nd April 2013. The Contempt of Court Bill proposes to repeal Section 5(1) of the Judicature Act (Cap. 8 of the Laws of Kenya) and provide for the substantive law on contempt of court in Kenya, while the Magistrates’ Courts Bill proposes to repeal the Magistrates’ Courts Act (Cap. 10 of the Laws of Kenya).
2.2.7    Media Bill, 2013
 
The Commission is currently undertaking an internal review of the Media Bill, 2013 which according to the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution is required to be enacted by 27th August 2013. In order to facilitate public participation as provided under Article 10(2)(a) of the Constitution, the Commission wrote a letter to the various stakeholders seeking views on technical and general issues on the draft Bill.
2.2.8    The Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2011
 
There have been several initiatives by different actors to undertake the review of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2011 with the possibility of amending the Act. Transparency International organized a three-day technical review on the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2011 to share with different stakeholders the proposed amendments. Transparency International is particularly interested in the enforcement of Chapter Six by the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC), which is established to ensure compliance with and enforcement of this chapter. The Act provides for the functions and powers of the Commission and the appointment of its members. In Transparency International’s view, “The existing law has been faulted for weaknesses that render the fight against corruption ineffective. The Commission cannot therefore effectively administer and ensure compliance as well as enforcement of Chapter Six”.
The process of reviewing related legislation (Anti-Corruption & Economic Crimes Act, EACC Act, Public Officers Ethics Act, 2003 and the Leadership & Integrity Act, 2012) was agreed in the technical meeting, which included the consensus to pursuewider consultation. EACC will play a key role in the review process. On its part, CIC will continue engaging Transparency International and EACC to ensure that this process is completed and that EACC is fully constituted and is able to carry out its mandate.
2.3      Development of Administrative Procedures and Regulations and Institutional Frameworks
 
2.3.1   Regulations to Effect Security-Related Acts of Parliament
 
The Commission made correspondences to the Ministries and state organs under the Executive and Security Thematic Area to establish the extent to which they had implemented the relevant provisions of the Constitution and other recently enacted Acts of Parliament, which are made pursuant to the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. The Commission received positive feedback and reports from various implementing agencies, and notes efforts by the Kenya Defence Forces in the development of sets of regulations to implement the Kenya Defence Forces Act. The Kenya Defence Forces and the Ministry of Defence submitted 15 sets of regulations in compliance with section 304 of the Act, which must be approved for gazettement by August 26, 2013. The Commission constituted a technical committee comprising representatives from the Ministry of State for Defence, Kenya Defence Forces, Office of the Attorney-General, Kenya Law Reform Commission and CIC to review these regulations to ensure conformity with Constitution and the Kenya Defence Forces Act, 2012.
The National Intelligence Service also provided updates on the progress of implementation of the National Intelligence Service Act, 2012. The Commission is following up with the Service to ensure that the requisite Regulations are gazzetted within the stipulated timelines.
The Commission notes the significance of full implementation of the National Government Coordination Act, National Security Council Act, National Police Service Act and National Intelligence Service Act. During the period under review, the Commission contacted the Ministry of State for Provincial Administration and Internal Security on the status of implementation of these Acts and the formulation of requisite policies and regulations. The Commission wrote to the Ministry on policies and regulations and shall follow-up until that is done within the stipulated timeline. Similarly, the Commission is following up with the office of the Inspector-General on the implementation of the National Police Service Act.
Generally, the Commission commends the cooperation by the Executive and security sector in the implementation of the Constitution, especially Chapter Nine and Fourteen of the Constitution. The Commission has established a close working relationship with various state organs, which will in tern foster the relationship to monitor and evaluate implementation of the Constitution. Next, the Commission is engaging the County Governments Executive to ensure realization of the letter and spirit of the Constitution.
 
2.3.2    Understanding Public Finance in the Counties
 
Following the success and widespread demand for the“50 Things Every Kenyan Needs to Know About Public Finance” publication, CIC has developed a handbook to act as a point of reference for public officers working in county governments. This handbook is expected to enhance  quick understanding of public finance under both the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act (2012). The handbook is the product of collaborative efforts with the International Budget Partnership (IBP).
The Commission also participated in the development of a public finance guide by the Transition Authority (TA) for use by both the County Assembly and the County Executive Committees. As an interim measure, the document is meant to guide the counties on the processes of budgeting, planning and service delivery.
 
Procurement has also been noted as a concern at the county level. The Commission is having discussions with the Public Procurement Oversight Authority (PPOA), among other key actors,  on how best to ensure that counties conduct their procurement activities within the law while at the same time receiving value for money.
2.3.3    Simplified Version of Chapter Five of the Constitution
 
The simplification of Chapter Five of the Constitution (Land and Environment) that started during the last quarter with support from Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) is meant to demystify Land and Environment issues in the Constitution for ease of understanding amongst Kenyans. The work has been finalized, and the booklet is in the process of printing after which it shall be circulatedto the public.
2.3.4Capacity Building of National and County Governments for the Implementation of Devolved System of Government
 
The Commission has been engaging with the concerned stakeholders to develop comprehensive programmes for capacity building of the National and County Governments for the implementation of the devolved system of government. During this quarter, the Commission participated in the finalization of a capacity building framework for the devolved system of government. The framework, which was developed by an inter-agency team that included both state and non-state actors, focuses on the development of knowledge and capability of those engaged in the devolution process in the short term. It is envisioned that this will strengthen the entry point of the Governors and various county teams to settle down seamlessly, and subsequently, in the longer term, access capacity building initiatives by way of induction for the elected and appointed officers for the transition period and beyond. The framework sets the foundation for the development of the required competencies for Government across the Executive and the Legislature at both the National and County levels of Government.
 
2.3.5    Enhanced CIC Capacity to Fulfil its Mandate
 
   Development of CIC Strategic Plan 2013 – 2015: Building on a review of its interim strategic plan, the Commission finalized its Strategic Plan 2013-2015 to consolidate gains on the implementation of the Constitution. This review has been driven by: (i) the transition to the system of devolved Government following the conclusion of Presidential and General Elections in March 2013, and; (ii) the need to upscale the Commission’s efforts to entrench a constitutional focus that endures beyond CIC’s term.
The Strategic Plan which gives the Vision of CIC as “A united and prosperous Kenya in which everyone respects, upholds and defends the Constitution”, and the Mission as “To ensure policies, laws, administrative procedures and institutional frameworks consistent with the letter and the spirit of the Constitution”, has identified two Strategic Themes: one focusing on the internal capacity of CIC and the other focusing on CIC coordination and partnership with external institutions in the implementation of the Constitution. To strengthen its role of facilitating, monitoring and overseeing the implementation of the Constitution, the Strategy has identified three Key Result Areas.
KRA 1: Internal Effectiveness and Enhanced Accountability
KRA 2: Increased Constitutional Compliance among State Actors
KRA 3: Citizens and Non State Actors Engaged in Monitoring and Facilitating the Implementation of the Constitution
It is envisioned that implementation of this strategic plan will set the foundation for the protection of the sovereignty of the people of Kenya as well as securing the observance by all state organs of the democratic values and principles set out in the Constitution and promote Constitutionalism.
 
Teambuilding: The Commission held a team building retreat to enhance the synergy and teamwork in its operations both vertically and horizontally. While address the ‘softer issues’ i.e., heart and mind sets of the CIC personnel, the retreat provided an opportunity for individual and collective reflection among all cadres within the context of their respective job descriptions on how to fully engage in the implementation of the Commission’s activities. Teambuilding sessions allowed for both the organization as a whole and each individual to assess how well placed the Commission is to achieve its goals. Further, the sessions enhanced  the team’s capacity to work together in identifying opportunities and overcoming bottlenecks.
 
PART THREE
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF DEVOLVED SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT
 
Section 15(2) (d) of Sixth Schedule to the Constitution mandates the Commission to monitor the effective implementation of the devolved system of Ggovernment. Section 4(a)(iii) and (iv) of the same schedule requires the Commission to report on:
The process of establishing the infrastructure necessary for the proper operation of each County, including progress on locating offices and assemblies and establishment and transfers of staff;
The devolution of powers and functions to the Counties under the legislation contemplated in section 15 of the Schedule.
In this quarter, CIC engaged various stakeholders to ensure effective implementation of the devolved system of government, sustaining the agenda in national discussions, consultations, advisories, trainings and public engagement such as through workshops and seminars for Governors and Senators. Advisories on the transition and consultative meetings set the pace for devolution after the general elections under the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. With the County Governments in place, it is evident that executing governance reforms as envisaged under the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 and operationalization of the devolution legislations face political, financial and other challenges that impact on service delivery.
The Commission’s activities on devolution this quarter, revolved around:
(1)     Consultative meetings with:
 
National Government
County Governments
Transition Authority
Commission on Revenue Allocation
Public Service Commission
Civil Society
(2)     Forums with Senators and Governors
(3)     County visits to access establishment of infrastructure necessary for the proper operation of the devolved system of government.  
(4)     Public engagements
In this section, , the Commission seeks to identify progress made so far in the implementation of the devolved system of government as well asa to highlight any gaps, challenges and possible interventions to ensure successful implementation of the devolved system of government.
3.1     Review of Existing Policies to Align them to the Constitution of Kenya, 2010
 
Effective implementation of devolved system of government requires review of all existing policies to conform to the letter and spirit of the Constitution to entrench devolution. At the moment, a comprehensive review of existing policies has not yet been achieved. This poses a challenge to the implementation of the devolved system of government. The Commission notes with concern that lack of policies could undermine the implementation of the devolved system of government.  The Commission is ready to support identification and review and/or development of such policies.
3.2     Devolution Legislation
 
Additional legislation is needed to support the implementation of devolution. Among the criteria that a county government has to meet before the transfer of functions under section 24 of the Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2012 is legislation relating to the functions applied for. Such legislation relate to functions allocated to the two levels of government under the 4th Schedule to the Constitution. The Commission  has been consulting with the national and county governments and Kenya Law Reform Commission for development of necessary legislation.
3.3     Integration and Implementation of the Equality Principle by County Organs
 
The Commission is implementing a capacity building programme to ensure effective integration and implementation of the principle of equality by devolved governance structures and equip those tasked with responsibilities of implementing devolution. The Commission plans to work with women representatives, persons with disabilities and minority groups in County Assemblies to facilitate their effective execution of role as members of the County Legislatures. The programme is intended to prepare those who benefit from affirmative action opportunities to demonstrate the value of this important constitutional and human rights principle.
Secondly, CIC plans to work with other implementers to audit the training curricula being developed for the capacity building programmes for County structures to ensure that they capture the principles and values of the Constitution, especially the principle of equality that is expected to deliver on equality in opportunities and equity in the sharing of resources.
During the months of April and May, 2013, CIC facilitated meetings with key stakeholders including the National Council for Persons with Disabilities (NCPWD), Kenya School of Government (KSG), Centre for Parliamentary Studies and Training (CPST), and Federation of Women Lawyers (FIDA), to develop the training curricula as well as in the training. The team agreed that, moving forward, manuals from different organizations would be audited and relevant material used in the development of the training curriculum. The manuals will be subjected to a validation forum, which will include more stakeholders, who will consequently participate in the implementation of the programme.
3.4     Implementation of the Right to Health under the Devolved Structure of Government
 
Health is one of the devolved functions under the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution and is one of the socio-economic rights recognized under Article 43 of the Constitution, which requires progressive realization. During this quarter, the Commission engaged the Ministry of Health on the implementation of the right to health. Following a request by the two Permanent Secretaries of the former Ministries of Health, a stakeholder forum was held in May 2013 on the implementation of the right to health under the devolved system of government.. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss four issues:
(i)   Procuring and managing essential health products and technologies under the devolved government structure;
(ii) Ensuring maintenance of standards in procurement and administration of special health commodities for public health programmes under the devolved structure of government;
(iii)        Management of the Health Sector Services Fund under the devolved structure of government, and;
(iv)        Management of Cross-County Hospital Services under the new constitutional order. 
The meeting, which brought together representatives from the Ministry of Health, the Chairman of the Council of Governors, Commission on Revenue Allocation, Transition Authority, County Health Workers and development partners including UNICEF, World Bank, DANIDA and USAID agreed as a way forward that the following issues should be addressed:
(a)      A functional analysis should be urgently conducted as envisioned under the Transition to Devolved Government Act. The functions should then be costed before the budget is determined for these functions.
(b)     The procurement of drugs and medical commodities is a function that belongs to both the National and County governments, and requires consultations between the two levels of Government to decide how best to address the issue of procurement.
(c)      There is need for a mechanism to facilitate ongoing services in Provincial hospitals, Level 5 health facilities and other health facilities with high traffic.
(d)     The Health Sector Services Fund (HSSF) is earmarked for operations of public primary care health facilities with an acceptable level of operational autonomy. The funds are meant for devolved levels of government and should be disbursed to the devolved levels. There is a need therefore to agree on the procedure relating to the channeling of these funds.
(e)      There is a need to set up an inter-governmental consultative forum for the health sector to guide the implementation of the Constitution and devolution.
As a follow-up on the action points from that stakeholder forum, , CIC convened two sectoral technical meetings in June 2013 with representatives from the Ministry of Health, Transitional Authority and the Kenya Law Reform Commission. The Commission held a further meeting with the Cabinet Secretary in the Ministry of Health in the same month. The meetings focused on the preparation of a technical roadmap that would guide the health sector in facilitating the devolution of functions as envisaged under the Constitution. In addition, the technical meetings noted other point as follows.
(a)     Unbundling of Functions
The task of undertaking functional analysis and unbundling is assigned to the Transitional Authority (TA) under the Transition to Devolved Governance Act, 2012. The task is supposed to be undertaken in accordance with the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. The meetings noted that key activities being undertaken include:
(i)   The Ministry of Health has developed a Functional Analysis and Assignment Paper that will guide in the detailed understanding of the exact functions that have been devolved to the Counties. 
(ii) The Transition Authority is in the process of engaging consultants to undertake a functional analysis.
(iii)        The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution will audit the functional analyses by the different Ministries and the Transition Authority.
 
(b)     Costing of Functions
Functional assignment will lead to capacity analysis to guide the costing of functions. The Ministry of Health has profiled the Counties on their health status and subsequently costed the functions. The County Mapping Report of the Ministry of Health will form part of the documents to be reviewed in determining the criteria for costing. The exercise will also take into account the constitutional principles, especially those in Chapter 12 relating to public finance. The Commission and CRA will continue to host meetings to facilitate discussions on the criteria for costing of functions.
(c)      Review of Policies, Laws and Regulations
In order to ensure that all policies, laws and regulations within the Health Sector are reviewed to comply with the letter and spirit of the Constitution and the devolved structure of government, it is essential that they be reviewed. The Ministry of Health has forwarded an interim submission of laws, policies and regulations within the health sector that require review or development. The Commission  is working with the Ministry in order to prioritize the review and development of these policies, laws and regulations.
(d)     Establishment of a Health Sector Inter-Governmental Technical Team
The need for a health sector inter-governmental technical team to be urgently constituted was noted to facilitate discussions/negotiations by the two levels of government on the implementation of a number of activities/programmes that may require inter-governmental arrangements. Among matters to be prioritized in these discussions are:
(i)           Implementation of the free maternal health
(ii)         Implementation of vaccination programmes
(iii)         Mechanism for procurement of drugs
(iv)        Management of Tuberculosis (TB)
(v)         Facilitation of service delivery in Provincial Hospitals, Level 5 health facilities and other health facilities with high traffic
(vi)        Implementation of the Health Sector Service Fund
The Commission will continue to engage with the Ministry of Health and the Council of Governors on the formation of the intergovernmental technical team, which will facilitate realization of the next steps.
3.5     Interaction with the Senate
 
The Commission has had various interactions with the Senate Committees under a capacity building framework. For instance, the Commission had an engagement with the Legal Affairs and Human Rights Committee of the Senate on the role and mandate of the committee and the extent to which the same can be used to champion devolution and its implementation under the Constitution.
It has been noted that Counties have been beset by conflicts arising from standoffs between the County Executive Committees and the County Assemblies with respect to the budget process and the allocation of expenditures. Majority of the Counties have registered concerns that, unlike the case of the County Executives, County Assemblies are allocating themselves huge funds and yet they have no implementable programs.. There is consensus on the need to develop a framework that advocates for cooperation and consultation between the county institutions whilst respecting institutional mandates and responsibilities, especially in planning and budgeting.
3.6     Retreat of Senators with the Commission
 
The Senate, in various provisions of the Constitution (Articles 96(1)(2)(3)(4), 217, 109 to 113) is mandated to protect the interests of the Counties and provide oversight over their operations. The devolved system of government and the bicameral system of parliament came into being on March 4th, 2013, after the first election under the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. After two months of devolved system of government, there have emerged operational challenges, including:
Delayed functional analysis affecting the transfer of functions to county governments;
Lack of clarity on the relationship between the National Executive and County Executives;
Financing of County Governments;
Capacity of County Governments to deliver services effectively;
Unbundling and articulation of functions and role of the Senate as stipulated in article 96 of the constitution.
Noting these challenges, CIC organized a retreat (May 17–18) attended by Senators, CIC and CRA, as the first in a series of planned meetings to clarify the roles of different actors in devolution. The retreat whose underpinning theme was “Role of the Senate in effective implementation of devolution” had two objectives:
(a)      To develop an understanding of the role of the Senate in the implementation of the devolved system of government, and their relationship with the Governors, and;
(b)     To develop working modalities between the Senate and CIC in implementation of the Constitution.
3.6.1    Role of the Senate in Effective Implementation of the Constitution
 
The May retreat that was attended by Senators, CIC and CRA explored the mandate of the Senate and operationalization of Article 94 and 96 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 and related laws and administrative procedures. It highlighted the eight key roles of Senate as follows:
(i)       Legislative role: making and reviewing laws as well as administrative procedures–Inter-Governmental Relations (Sec 38) and Urban Areas and Cities (Sec 53), 2012. Senate can also confer legislative power to any other person;
 
(ii)     Determination of the allocation of national revenue among Counties (Art 217);
 
(iii)    Protection of the interests of the Counties and their Governments and promote the democratic governance of the Republic i.e., ensuring faithfulness to Article 6– distinctiveness, interdependence and cooperation and adequate support to Counties (Articles 190, 192, 202, 203, 204, 211-214, 218, 220 and 225);
(iv)    Approval of: (i) Division of Revenue Bill (218); (ii) Declaration of war by the President (132-4); (iii) Any spending on supplementary appropriation (223); Allocation of funds to enable each commission and independent office to perform its function (249); and renew decision to stop transfer of funds (225); suspension of County and Urban Areas and Cities;
(v)     Consideration of Appeals
(vi)    Exercise oversight on: (i) Revenue allocated to the County; (ii) National Security subject to the authority of the Constitution and Parliament (Art 238); (iii) Approve deployment by the National Security Council of national forces outside Kenya and foreign forces in Kenya; (iv) State Officers; (v) Reports;
(vii)  Amendments and County Boundaries;
(viii) Representation of individual Counties through the application of Articles 118 and 119 and the participation of the people in Senate Processes.
3.6.2    Role of CIC and Linkages with the Senate
 
The following were highlighted as CIC roles and linkages with the Senate:
(i)       Legislation: Developing legislation required under the Fifth Schedule and specifically laws related to devolved government found in Section 5(6) and 14(1) of the Sixth Schedule. Legislation development enables the: (i) Engagement with Committees at pre-scrutiny and post publication stages of processing legislative proposals through meetings, workshops and retreats, and; (ii) sharing of recommendations of the Commission on laws relating to devolution and regular updates by CIC to Senate on new legislation required or amendments that are to be made.
(ii)     Representation of interests of the Counties: This involves monitoring the implementation of devolution, which is found under section 15(d) through: (i) Submission of progress reports on transition to devolved government; (ii) advisories on matters of interest to County Government; (iii) Collaboration on public participation initiatives on matters relating to implementation of devolution (iv) Consultation and cooperation between CIC and the Speaker, Clerk and Leaders of Majority and Minority.
(iii)    Oversight over national revenue allocated: Section 4(3) of the Sixth Schedule provides for CIC to give progress reports to Parliament on matters relating to transition and devolution through: (i) Review of legislation that is unconstitutional and undermines devolution; (ii) review of existing legislation to align with the Constitution and give effect to the devolution of functions; (iii) review of the Division of Revenue Bill to ensure that the interests of the Counties are protected during transition, and; (iv) development of legislation relating to Counties.
3.6.3    Role of the Senate in the Budget Making Process
 
The role of the Senate in budget making is informed by Chapter 12 of the Constitution, and specifically Article 201. These provisions are aimed at informing policy formulation and sustainable management of public resources. As such the Senate must stand guided by these principles when executing its mandate under the budget process as follows:
(i)       Division of Revenue Bill and the County Allocation of Revenue Bill - formulation and subsequent passage as well as any bill dealing with County financial matters;
(ii)     Examining the financial statements and other documents submitted to the Senate, and making recommendations to the Senate for improving the management of County Government’s public finances;
(iii)    Monitoring the adherence by the Senate to the principles of public finance set out in the Constitution, and to the fiscal responsibility principles of the Public Finance Management Act.
3.6.4    Relationship between the Senate, National Assembly, National Executive, County Executive and the County Assemblies
 
In the discussions, it was considered that the Senate and the National Assembly together make up ParliamentIt was noted that the two Houses ought to have committees to resolve any issues and disagreements that may arise in the course of the implementation of their respective mandates. In addition, it was agreed that both Housesshould maintain a good relationship with the National Executive, which would enable them to effectively exercise their right to summon National Government Cabinet Secretaries to make submissions to the Senate. Further, it was agreed that the Senate together with the Counties ought to consult with County Governors and any relevant offices of the County Government in the determination of allocation of revenue. Thus both the Senate and County Assemblies are legislative bodies, which have the responsibility of oversight over the County Executives. The main issues noted on this included:
(i)       Authority to oversight: There was the need to understand how the Senate would operationalize this power of oversight, of which it was clearly stated that the Senate protects minorities.
 
(ii)     County Legislations: The Speaker of the National Assembly should have an obligation to check legislations affecting Counties and refer them to the Senate and that the Senate is also to provide continuous oversight on the County Executive and County Legislature through the revision of the County Government Act.
3.6.5    Legislative Audit
 
The discussion highlighted the legislative audit undertaken by CIC and notedthe need to review existing, including recently passed legislation to ensure that it meets the constitutional threshold.. The Senate has a duty to ensure that the unconstitutional provisions of the Acts that touch on County Governments are corrected. Some of the amendments are substantive and require separate amendment legislation, i.e., a Miscellaneous Amendments Bill. Some of the unconstitutional provisions noted include instances where legislation gives functions to National Governments that in the 4th Schedule of the Constitution are deemed to be County Government functions.  To address the gaps, it was agreed that various committees of the Senate have a duty to scrutinize various legislations under their mandate before the Bill is brought to the floor of the House for debate. The action points and responsibilities arising from this retreat are listed in Annex 1A.
3.7     Retreat of Governors with the Commission
 

With the mandate derived from section 15(2) (d) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution to ensure the effective implementation of the system of devolved government, the Commission in consultation with the Council of Governors convened a Governors retreat in June 2013 with the following objectives:

(a)      To develop a shared understanding of implementation of the devolved system of government and addressing the emerging implementation issues, specifically in: (i) Transfer of functions to counties; (ii) county institutional frameworks and human resource; (iii) intergovernmental relations and public participation; (iv) planning and public finance management at the county level; and (v) transitional and legislative issues.
 
(b)     To discuss and agree on the kind of support required from CIC by Governors and the Council of Governors.

During the meeting, the following issues that require interventions were identified.

(a) Transfer of Functions to Counties and Other Transitional Issues
The allocation of functions to national and county government is determined by the 4th Schedule of the Constitution and the task of undertaking functional analysis is assigned to the Transition Authority. The resulting functional assignment presents three categories of functions, i.e., (1) exclusive to one level of government; (2) concurrent functions i.e., conferred on more than one level of government, and (3) residual functions i.e., those assigned to the national level by virtue of not having been assigned to the county level of government by the Constitution or national legislation (Article 186, Constitution of Kenya).  In the execution of the transfer of functions, the meeting noted two key concerns:
Assigning of functions to National Government agencies, which in the 4th Schedule are exclusive to County Government. This has been through legislation e.g., the KEMSA Act, and through policies or guidelines e.g., the on-going reclassification of roads previously assigned to counties.
Lack of policy guidelines on undertaking concurrent functions e.g. disaster management.
The composition of the Transition Authority, which currently comprises the representation of National Government only.
 
(b) County Institutional Frameworks and Human Resource
The Governors and CIC agreed that an enabling institutional environment is required to ensure effective devolution. The meeting noted the following based on the experience of implementation of the devolved system of government during the past month:
The lack of establishment of the required institutional frameworks, i.e., the County Executive, the County Executive Committees and the County Public Service Boards.
The need to address human resources gaps, i.e., the need to clarify reporting lines for interim/transition staff where some staff seem to have multiple reporting lines while not recognizing Governors as the final authority in matters relating to County Executive functions.
The need to ensure that corruption and maladministration is not devolved.
The need to address capacity gaps both in terms of staff competencies and staffing levels.
Personnel emolument challenges: (i) That County Governments may inherit huge wage bills if County Governments will be required to pay all staff based in the Counties; (ii) the terms of employment for County Executive Committees are not sufficiently competitive to attract the best persons required to steer the County Governments’ development agenda.
 
(c)  Intergovernmental Relations and Public Participation
The deliberations centered on the required National and County Government relationships and citizen engagement to ensure effective service delivery. Among the key issues addressed were:
National government - (i) Restructuring of provincial administration to address current overlaps with County Government; and (ii) post legislation operationalization of the provisions on County security oversight committees;
Intra-governmental relations – (i) the necessary linkages between the executive and legislative arms of the County Government to ensure that they work together to ensure the realization of the objects of devolution; and (ii) the present lack of full operationalization of the structures provided for in the Intergovernmental Relations Act, 2012.
 
(d) Planning and Public Financial Management
The importance of integrated planning and prudent financial management and the provisions of the devolution was emphasized. Three key issues were identified based on the emerging challenges in in planning and public finance management as follows:
Inadequate statistical information to facilitate County planning
Resource gaps occasioned by: (i) Delays in releasing county funds held by the Transition Authority for the FY2012/13. Only 40% of the funds had been disbursed to Counties; (ii) some County Assemblies seeking inordinately high allocations compared to the developmental requirements of the County; (iii) multiplicity of devolved funds that are not linked to the County development agenda.
Gaps in existing procurement laws and procedures with regard to provisions for County Government procurement.
Annex 1B provides the resolutions adopted to be implemented by the County Governments, CIC, the Intergovernmental Summit and the Council of Governors to address the challenges noted above and to push forward the devolution agenda.
3.8     Water Sector Devolution Round Table
 
Water and Livelihoods Network (WALINET), ARTICLE 19 Kenya, Kenya Water Partnership (KWP) and Centre for Social Planning and Administrative Development (CESPAD) in conjunction with other CSOs and stakeholders in the water sector organized a devolution forum at Sarova Panafric Hotel on 14th June, 2013. The forum brought together key stakeholders in the water sector, including Ministry Officials, TA, CIC, Governor’s and Senate Representatives, elected County Government officials, the civil society and key policy and opinion leaders in the water sector. Amongthe key objectives of the forum were to:
Analyze the sector’s devolution status and point out key policy and legislation gaps.
Deliberate on “readiness” and “capacity” of County Governments in taking up water and sanitation services.
Project inter-county sharing of water resources and dispute handling mechanisms.
 Analyze the overlaps in the proposed water bill.
Discuss the role and mandate of the National Land Commission on water.
Discuss devolution of water funds as well as sewerage and sanitation funding.
Discuss engagement with the Functional Assignment and Competency Team (FACT) as set by the TA.
Seek a way-forward on the above issues.
After the presentations and plenary session, the following recommendations were made:
Prof Munguti of KWP and Mr. Oloo of MWI to follow up on the current status and position of FACT teams and what criteria it takes to participate in these teams;
Alois Muthini of WALINET and Njambi Odongo of ACT to follow up on the progress of the response to the memo of recommendations sent to CIC in November 2012 and to check on the status of the water policy and continue engaging with CIC for wider participation of different actors;
With the given feedback from the above follow up actions, the conveners to check if there is need to call for separate meeting for Governors through the Council of Governors, TA, CIC and the MWIE for consensus; andCircumstances allowing, have a series of forums for discussions and to maintain the momentum to support devolution in taking root.

3.9     County Visits, Objectives and Findings
 
As part of its efforts to assess the counties readiness, the Commission organized County visits to discuss the following issues: 

(1)     Uptake of service delivery responsibilities by County Governments of functions transferred to them immediately after the first elections under the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
(2)     Planning on delivery of functions and the necessary institutional mechanisms to execute the functions. 
(3)     Legal frameworks relating to the functions to be delivered.
(4)     Administrative units related to the functions.
(5)     Further decentralization of the functions and provision of related services by the County Government.
(6)     Financial management systems.
(7)     Budgeting process by Counties for the financial year 2013 / 2014.
(8)     Inter-governmental relations.


(9)     Recognition of the distinctiveness of the two levels of government in execution of functions assigned.
(10)  Relationship between the Senate and the County Assemblies.
(11)  Operationalization of urban areas and cities.
(12)  Financing of County Governments.
(13)  Capacity building of County Governments.
(14)  County governance unit (executive committee and county services boards).
(15)  Capacity assessment in relation to the functions allocated to County Governments.
(16)  Transition implementation plans.
(17)  Integration of national values and principles, in particular Articles 10, 201 and 232 of the Constitution to ensure the Counties can perform the devolved functions

The Commission believes that a thorough deliberation of these issues will guide and enable the effective implementation of the devolved system of government and also help County Governments effectively carry out their functions.  Using the information from the Counties, CIC is currently engaging with different stakeholders responsible of the transition activities to ensure that the emerging challenges are addressed. 
PART FOUR
 
MEDIA STATEMENTS AND PUBLIC ADVISORIES
 
In recognition of the sovereign power of the people of Kenya as enshrined in Article 1 of the Constitution and in recognition of the fundamental right to information under Article 35 of the Constitution of Kenya and the National Values and Principles of Governance set out in Article 10 of the Constitution, the Commission strives to keep the people of Kenya informed on the status of the implementation process and other matters that touch on constitutionality. The media plays a critical role in enabling the Commission to reach a larger national audience through statements published in the local dailies, as well as media briefings broadcast on television and radio programmes. The Commission  held several press conferences and released several statements through the CIC website and social media pages touching on various subjects, including the following:
4.1     Unconstitutionality of the Constituencies Development Fund (CDF) Act, 2013
 
An impending operationalization of the CDF Act 2013 led the Commission to publish an opinion on the unconstitutionality of the Act, which was carried in the local dailies on Wednesday, 17 April, 2013. The Commission stated that the Act does not respect the constitutional division of functions between the County and National Governments, and the principle of separation of powers between the Legislature and the Executive, contrary to the key principles of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. The Commission also advised that the Act offends Article 202(2) of the Constitution on conditional and unconditional Grants, and the provisions of the Division of Revenue under Articles 202 and 218 of the Constitution.
The Commission therefore recommended that the implementation of the CDF Act 2013 be halted and the Act be reviewed after discussions among all relevant stakeholders on the issues raised, and the need to respect and facilitate devolution and respect the constitutional principle on separation of powers and other provisions of the Constitution. 
4.2     CIC Statement on the Role of Senate in Revenue Bills and on Salaries of MPs
 
On Monday, 27 May 2013, CIC published a statement to advise the people of Kenya on the debates by Parliament regarding the involvement of the Senate in the consideration and passage of the Division of Revenue Bill, 2013 and the then on-going spirited campaign by the National Assembly against the Salaries and Remuneration Commission (SRC) and other Constitutional Commissions. The statement was necessitated by a call for the disbandment of the Salaries and Remuneration Commission by members of the National Assembly, as well as a debate on supremacy between the National Assembly and the Senate  and its effect on the Division of Revenue Bill. 
The Commission called for collaboration between State organs and the use of laid down procedures to resolve any disputes among the various bodies. The Commission also urged State Officers to recognize that the authority assigned to them is a public trust to be exercised in a manner that brings honour to the nation and dignity and respectability to the office.
4.3   Statement by the Commission  on the Resolution by the National Assembly Regarding the Setting of Remuneration and Benefits of State Officers
Pursuant to its mandate, CIC issued an advisory to the people of Kenya on Wednesday, 29 May 2013 regarding the decision by the National Assembly on 28th May 2013, to adopt the report of its Committee on Delegated Legislation. In adopting that report, the National Assembly resolved to revoke the Gazette Notices 2885, 2886, 2887 and 2888 published by the Salaries and Remuneration Commission on 1st March, 2013.
The Commission expressed concern that in proceeding to vote on the subject and pass a resolution on it, which clearly was a question which members of the National Assembly individually had a pecuniary interest, the express provision of Article 122(3) was not respected. The Commission advised that when SRC set the remuneration and benefits of State Officers and communicated the same through the said Gazette Notices, those terms became effective. Thereafter, those terms can only be changed by SRC itself reviewing them, or pursuant to judicial intervention. Therefore, in the opinion of CIC, the National Assembly Remuneration Act is not applicable, to the extent of any inconsistency with the Constitution (Article 2(4) and Section 7 of the Sixth Schedule).
4.3     Advisory on Transfer of Functions from the National to County Governments
 
On Thursday, 13 June 2013, CIC issued to the public an advisory on the requirements for the transfer of functions from National to County governments as outlined in Section 15 of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution and the Transition to Devolved Government Act 2012.  In the advisory, CIC expressed its concern on the hurried and sometimes ad hoc manner in which the transition process is being carried out. The Commission therefore urged the various players involved in the process of devolution to restructure the process of transfer of functions to County Governments to ensure that it complies with the letter and sprit of the Constitution and the law. The Commission also called on the Senate to play its role of protecting the Counties and County Governments, by ensuring that they get sufficient funding for the legally transferred functions through a seamless transition process.
4.5   Advisory on the Status of Implementation of the Constitution and System of Devolution for the Period Running From June 2013 – December 2015
(1)     CIC Mandate and Role
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution is a constitutional organ mandated by the Constitution to monitor, facilitate and oversee the development of legislation and administrative procedures required to implement the Constitution, and to monitor the effective implementation of the system of devolved government. Additionally, along with other constitutional commissions and independent offices, CIC is expected to secure the observance by all State Organs of democratic values and principles and to promote constitutionalism.
(2)     Devolution
The general foundations of the system of devolved government are now in place. The Commission is mandated by Section 15 (2d) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution to effectively monitor the implementation of the devolved system of government. To achieve this, CIC will work with National and County Governments to ensure the development and review of existing policies, legislation, administrative procedures and institutional frameworks which respect and promote the objects of devolution as provided for in Article 174 of the Constitution.
(3)     Status of Required Policies, Legislation, Regulations, Administrative Procedures and Institutional Frameworks
During the past two years, the Commission, working with the relevant state organs as well as citizens and other non-state actors, has facilitated, monitored and overseen the enactment of legislation in line with the timelines stipulated in the 5th Schedule of the Constitution; review and development of subsidiary legislation; facilitation of review/development of some of the requisite policies, administrative procedures and institutional frameworks and implementation of preparations to transition to the system of devolved government. 
In the Commission’s remaining term which coincides with the Phase II of the transition period (three years), CIC, working with the relevant state organs as well as citizens and other non-state actors, will continue to monitor, facilitate and oversee the review/development and application of policies, enactment of legislation, administrative procedures and institutional frameworks, to ensure their compliance with the letter and spirit of the Constitution. Deliberations between Parliament, the Attorney General and Kenya Law Reform Commission agreed on a legislative process to be followed, in compliance with Article 261. This will involve CIC reviewing Bills during the pre-scrutiny and committee stages of processing legislative proposals to ensure they comply with the letter and spirit of the Constitution.
Presented below is the list of policies, legislation and administrative procedures identified by the Commission to ensure the effective implementation of the Constitution. A detailed matrix is found in Annex 2.
(a)  Legislation under the 5th Schedule to the Constitution;
(b) Other legislation required to implement the Constitution;
(c)  Existing legislation that require review;
(d) National policies required by the 4th schedule and various articles to provide a framework for legislation & administrative procedures;
(e)  Administrative procedures to operationalize Acts enacted under the 5th Schedule to the Constitution;
(f)  Activities related to monitoring the implementation of the system of devolved government
PART FIVE
 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENTS
 
The Commission engages with stakeholders in a consultative approach to implementation of the Constitution. Stakeholders include Commissions and Independent Offices, Ministries, Departments and State Agencies, the Judiciary, the National Assembly and Non-State Actors (NSAs). The engagements are in addition to consultations ordinarily undertaken in the course of developing and reviewing particular policies, legislation or regulations. The following is a brief overview of stakeholder engagements undertaken by the Commission during the quarter.
 
5.1     Induction of Commissioners and Senior Officers of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission
 
The Commission participated in the induction retreat for the new Commissioners and senior members of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission on 19th June, 2013 at Panari Centre. This retreat was organized by the Department of Justice in collaboration with the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission. The Commission was specifically tasked with sharing with the inductees on the mplementation of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012, and the experiences and lessons on vetting for elective and appointive positions.  During this induction, CIC led discussions on:
 
The Constitution and normative context of the national values and principles of governance
Understanding the scope and application of Chapter Six on Leadership and Integrity
Challenges and opportunities in fostering constitutionalism and promoting national values and the bill of rights in fighting corruption and economic crimes.
The Commission will continue collaborating and working closely with EACC as a constitutional commission to ensure that the Constitution is respected.
 
5.2   University of Nairobi (College/Unit Corruption Prevention Committee Secretaries, College Registrars and Key Officers)
 
5.3   The Commission participated in a sensitization workshop by the University of Nairobi (UoN) with special reference to Chapter Six of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 for its officers. One of the issues raised by the participants is the need for sensitization for all members in the different branches of the universities, some of which are in different Counties. The University also requested that in the future, CIC should engage with the University and clearly spell out for the University their specific roles as well as the role of academia in general  in the implementation of the Constitution. National Assembly Committee on Implementation of the Constitution
The Commission participated in the induction of the members of the Committee on the implementation of the Constitution. The Commission gave an update on the progress of the implementation of the Constitution andelaborated on how CIC realizes its mandate.  A follow-up retreat will be organized for all the members of the National Assembly to engage with the Commission.
 
5.4     Annual Scientific Conference of the Kenya Pharmaceutical Association
 
The Commission participated at the Annual Scientific Conference of the Kenya Pharmaceutical Association held on 25th May 2013. The Association comprises the Pharmaceutical Technologists and other pharmaceutical services providers working in both the private and public sectors.  The Commission guided the Association on the realization of their role under the devolved system of Government.
5.5     A Blurb to a Cultural Publication – Ekegusii Encyclopaedia
 
The Commission wrote an endorsement for an Ekegusii language publication, the Ekegussi Encylopaedia. The publication seeks to achieve the national goals and principles for the respect and promotion of culture under Articles 7 and 10 to the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
 
5.6 Meeting with the Kenya Roads Board
 
In a meeting with the Kenya Roads board, the Commission provided wide-ranging advice on the constitutional implications of the mandates given to bodies whose functions wholly or partly fell under devolved government.
 
5.7     Speeches in Various Fora
 
The Commission participated in and gave presentation in various for a, including:
 
(a)      Kisii University public lecture on the dynamics of transition to devolution.
(b)     Journalists’ gala that was held to mark successes in promotion of press freedom.
(c)      Education Fair that was convened to further the realization of the right to education.
(d)     Workshop of Anglican Church leaders on the country’s reform progress.
(e)      Diaspora meetings in North Carolina, New Jersey as well as welcoming interactions with Kenyans in Toronto, Canada.
5.8     CIC Consultative Forum on Access to Justice
 
On 25th June 2013, CIC held a Stakeholders’ Consultative Forum on Access to Justice at Mayfair Hotel, Nairobi. The Forum brought together all key stakeholders in the Justice chain including the Law Society of Kenya, the National Legal Aid Awareness Programme, the National Council on Administration of Justice, International Commission of Jurists (ICJ-Kenya), Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the National Gender and Equality Commission and the Federation of Women Lawyers (FIDA-Kenya).   The objectives of the forum were to:
       (a)            disseminate the consultant’s report and recommendations;
      (b)            present the Commission’s concept paper and the proposed plan of action for realization of the constitutional right of access to justice guaranteed by Article 48 of the Constitution; and
       (c)             discuss the strengthening of traditional dispute resolution mechanisms in line with the Constitution of Kenya.
 
The forum identified the following issues, which should be addressed to ensure access to justice for all:
 
      (a)            Past experiences show various efforts to enhance access to justice but different sectors working in isolation.
     (b)            Gaps in the legislative framework.
      (c)            Special interest and vulnerable groups not clearly catered for in the justice chain e.g., inaccessible facilities.
     (d)            Limited civic awareness on access to justice.
      (e)            Alternative Dispute Resolution not fully utilized.
      (f)            Potential in traditional dispute resolution not fully realized.
      (g)            High litigation costs.
     (h)            Scanty data and lack of proper documentation.
       (i)            No clear legal and administrative framework for paralegals.
       (j)            No linkage between access to justice and development.
     (k)            Lack of standardized environment for traditional justice systems.
       (l)            Lack of a clear legal and administrative framework to support traditional dispute resolution.
 
As a way forward the forum proposed further work in the area, in particular it was deemed necessary to review the  legal, policy, administrative and institutional frameworks on access to justice and traditional dispute resolution in a holistic manner while at the same time taking into account the past experiences and programmes in the sector.
 
5.9     Launch of NCAJ Strategic Plan and Court User Committees Guidelines
 
The Commission attended the launch of the National Council on the Administration of Justice (NCAJ) Strategic Plan 2012-2016 on 20th June 2013 at the Supreme Court Building. The Commission is a co-opted member of the Council and participates in Council meetings and activities. The mandate of NCAJ as stipulated in the Act is to ensure a coordinated, efficient, effective and consultative approach in the administration of justice and reform of the justice system. Specific functions of the NCAJ are to:
      (a)            formulate policies relating to the administration of justice;
     (b)            implement, monitor, evaluate and review strategies for the administration of justice;
      (c)            facilitate the establishment of Court Users Committees at the county level; and
     (d)            mobilize resources for purposes of the efficient administration of justice. 
The Strategic Plan 2012-2016, which was prepared through a participatory approach that ensured consultations and involvement of a broad spectrum of internal and external stakeholders at all stages focuses on providing the NCAJ with a roadmap towards the delivery of its mandate. The Plan sets out its vision (its preferred future), mission, key functions, core values and strategic objectives as well as strategies.
PART SIX
LITIGATION
In the period under review, the Commission was involved in litigation in various capacities.  This section gives a brief overview of cases in which judgments were issued as well as pending cases.
6.1      Decided Cases
 
6.1.1   Civil Appeal No. 351 of 2012 The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution -vs- The Attorney General and Another
This was an appeal filed by the Appellant, the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution, against the judgment of the High Court (Majanja, J.) delivered on 15th November 2012 by which the learned judge dismissed Petition No. 389 of 2012 filed by CIC against the Attorney General and the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission. The dispute before the High Court related to the constitutionality of Section 34(9) of the Elections Act.
At the hearing of the appeal, the Appellants argued that in interpreting “special interests” as used in, inter alia, Article 97 (1) (c) of the Constitution, the High Court should have applied the interpretational principle of ejusdem generis so that to qualify for inclusion, any additional or special interest needed to have a rational connection with youth, persons with disabilities and workers or else it would not fit in and the Presidential and Deputy Presidential candidates certainly did not belong in the categories of special interests or vulnerabilities listed in the Constitution.
The Court held that the superior court misdirected itself in its interpretation of ‘special interests’ and declared section 34(9) of the Elections Act void as it is in contravention with Articles 97(1)(c), 98(1)(b)(c)(d),100 and 177(a)(b) and (c) of the Constitution.
The Court of Appeal stated as follows:
“In the spirit of harmonization, and having considered the scheme of representation that runs through the Articles that deal with the Senate and those that deal with the County Assemblies, we have no doubt that the next category of members of the National Assembly under Article 97 (1)(c) must logically be the marginalized groups.
We agree that ‘special interests’ is not defined in the Constitution but from what we have said regarding the corresponding provisions for the other legislative assemblies, they must bear the same meaning as marginalized groups. Moreover, this accords with our own understanding that the rationale for special seats is to open up political space for the entry and participation of persons, groups and categories of people who, due to various disadvantages and vulnerabilities, have historically been unable or incapable of generally and effectively finding their way through a strictly competitive methodology and have thus been relegated to the peripheries of the political playground.”
6.2     Petitions Pending Before the Courts
 
The Commission has been enjoined in the following suits with are pending before the courts:
 
6.2.1H.C Petition No. 71 of 2013 The Institute for Social Accountability (TISA) –vs- The Hon. Attorney General and Another, CIC – Interested Party
 
This is a petition challenging the constitutionality of the decision of the Minister for Finance to release the sum of Kshs. 10.1 Billion to the Constituencies Development Fund (CDF) Management Board for disbursement to constituencies under the auspices of the Constituencies Development Fund at a time when Parliament was facing dissolution by operation of law and local authorities were facing imminent dissolution.
The Petition came up for directions on Thursday 27th June 2013, before the Hon. Justices Lenaola, Ngugi and Majanja and was set for hearing on 25th July 2013.
6.2.2.  Supreme Court Advisory Opinion Application No. 2 of 2013, In the Matter of the Division of Revenue Bill, 2013
The Senate filed an application in the Supreme Court seeking an Advisory Opinion on the constitutionality of the National Assembly’s decision to ignore its amendment to the Division of Revenue Bill, which was enactment and signed into law by the President on 11th June 2013.
PART SEVEN
ACTIVITIES FOR THE NEXT QUARTER (JULY–SEPTEMBER, 2013)
7.1     Policies
 
(a)      Consultative forums on the audit of the Health Sector Policies, under the Health Sector
(b)     Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the identification and audit of sectoral policies
(c)      Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Sports, Culture and Arts on the identification and audit of sectoral policies.
(d)     Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries to identify policies that need to be developed or reviewed and agree on working modalities.
(e)      Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services to prioritize policies for review or development.
(f)      Identification, review and/or development of policies to facilitate implementation of devolved system of government.
(g)      Engaging Ministries responsible for security for development of security related policies.
 
7.2     Review of Legislation
 
(a)    Finalization of security-related Bills as well as respective regulations to ensure that they are Gazetted. These include:
(1)   National Coroners Service Bill
(2)   Private Securities Regulations Bill
(3)   National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill, and
(4)   National Police Service (Amendment) Bill
(b)   Finalization of the audit of the National Registration and Identification Bill 2012 and Refugee Bill 2013
(c)    Review the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2011 and the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012 and forward the proposals to the office of the Attorney-General for further action.
(d)   Review of the Basic Education Act, 2013 and working with the Ministry of Education on the re-alignment of the Education Sector to the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
(e)    Finalization of the audit of the Health Bill 2013.
(f)    Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries to identify legislation that need to be developed or reviewed and agree on working modalities with the Ministry.
(g)    Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services to prioritize legislation for review or development.
7.3   Regulations and Institutional Frameworks
 
(a)      Engagements with relevant stakeholders on the implementation of the right to health under the devolved government structure.
(b)     Finalization of a publication of papers presented during the public participation workshop.
(c)      Engagement with Cabinet Secretaries (of Ministries assigned to Citizenship and Human Rights thematic area) i.e., Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Health and Ministry of Arts, Culture and Sports.
(d)     Engaging TA, Senate and Council of Governors on finalization of function analysis and assignment.
(e)      Development of a training program for county governments.
(f)      Citizen Engagement in the development and audit of policies, legislation and administrative procedures.
(g)      Engagements with County Governments on the implementation of the Constitution, specifically the devolved system of government.
(h)     Work with Public Service Commission (PSC) to address challenges arising from human resource capacity or lack thereof at the county and national government.
(i)       Work with PSC on development of comprehensive legislation for the public service including the Values and Principles of Public Service anticipated in Article 232 of the Constitution.
(j)       Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries to identify administrative procedures and institutional frameworks that need to be developed or reviewed and agree on working modalities with the Ministry.
(k)     Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services to prioritize administrative procedures and institutional frameworks for review or development.
7.4   Engagement with County Assemblies
 
7.4.1   Development of a training manual for women and people with disability and representatives of marginalized communities in elective and nominated positions at county assemblies to ensure effective integration and implementation of the principle of equality at the devolved governance level.
 
7.4.2   As part of monitoring, facilitating and overseeing the implementation of the Constitution of Kenya (2010), CIC will assess the progress made by each County Assembly provided for in the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, the County Governments Act (2012), the Public Finance Management Act (2012) and other relevant laws of Kenya. To achieve this, CIC is designing a monitoring tool on activities undertaken by each County Assembly, from inception to 30th June 2013.  The monitoring tool is designed for each county assembly to:
 
Indicate the type and number of roles and responsibilities addressed during the period;
Inform CIC on the status of the County Assembly’s transition plans;
Provide details of the structure and systems put in place (e.g. Laws, Administration Procedures, Human Resource Management, Asset Management, Financial Management, facilitating of participation in matters with County authorities etc.)
7.5     Support for Increased Constitutional Compliance among State Actors
 
Informed by the outputs of the baseline survey and analysis of the reports received from public institutions, during the next quarter, the Commission will work with the relevant actors to review institutional frameworks and systems as well as facilitate, monitor and oversee behaviour and systems change. This will involve working with the National and County levels of government across the Executive and Legislature as well as with the Judiciary and Constitutional Commissions to develop change champions. The Commission will utilize results and human- rights-based approaches in these engagements. 
7.6     Support to Citizen and Non-State Actor Engagement in the Monitoring and Implementation of the Constitution:
 
The Commission will review and implement its stakeholder engagement framework to ensure more robust dialogue and participation of both citizens and other non-state actors in the monitoring and facilitation of the implementation of the Constitution. This initiative will be informed by the ongoing work towards the development of a public participation framework by other state actors. Among the key initiatives to be undertaken in this regard will include round tables/public dialogue at the National and County level on the implementation of the Constitution.  
7.7     Enhancing CIC Capacity
 
Following the finalization of the CIC Strategic Plan for the 2013-2015 period, internal organizational development initiatives shall be centered on compliance with the strategic plan. This shall entail support to the alignment of thematic area initiatives to CIC’s strategic direction and support for the finalization and implementation of CIC policies and resource mobilization. Further, operationalization of various initiatives will take into account the framework developed for enhancing teamwork within the institution. 
7.8         Change Management for Implementation of CoK 2010
 
The National Government has been constituted and County Governments are in the process of establishing their assembly and executive entities. All public entities from both levels will require sensitization on change management to ensure that a culture of constitutionalism starts to take root in Kenya. Initial activities will be to unbundle the key aspects of change management, development of a guide for implementing change management, and supporting public entities to finalize their change management strategies.
 
7.9     Strategic Framework for Socio-Economic Rights
 
The Commission, through Organization Development and Institutional Strengthening has developed a strategic framework for progressive realization of socio-economic rights. The framework is already being implemented with integrated planning and policy development commenced in the health and agriculture sectors. In the next quarter, the framework will be rolled out to other Article 43 sectors.
 
7.10  Finalization of Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework
 
During the last quarter, the Commission started three key activities to assess the level of implementation of the Constitution.  These include: a) baseline survey, b) analysis of progress reports from Ministries and state agencies, and c) development of Constitutional Case Law Digest (Compendium). The Commission has also developed a number of monitoring and reporting tools on constitutional implementation. During the coming quarter, the Commission will finalize its monitoring, evaluation and learning (M, E&L) framework with three components:
 
(i)   CIC internal M, E&L framework and plan based on its strategic plan and programmes. This plan will enable CIC to monitor implementation of its programme activities and financial expenditure, achievement of its targets and quality of the programmes.
(ii)     The Constitution Implementation M, E&L framework based on the information needs of stakeholders and evaluation of impact of constitutional implementation.
(iii)    The M, E&L plan that will lay out the institutional arrangements for M, E&L, the data collection and information flow processes, the information management system, mechanisms for utilization of M&E information at all levels, the learning platforms to be established, capacity building and resources required and an action plan.
The Commission will finalize analysis of Reports from Ministries and State Organs on the Progress of Implementation of the Constitution, finalize development of Constitutional Case Law Digest (Compendium), and identification and prioritization of legislation for enactment.
 
PART EIGHT
 
CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Challenges
The Commission experienced the following challenges in the discharge of overseeing the implementation of the Constitution during the reporting period.
 
8.1     Implementation of the Devolved System of Government
 
(a)      Incomplete Phase One transition activities, including delayed functional analysis which has affected transfer of functions to County Governments.
(b)     Absence of clarity and transparency in the transition process.
(c)      Lack of goodwill from the Executive.
(d)     Ignorance of the law for political expediency.
(e)      Lack of programmes to build capacity of County Governments on devolution.
(f)      Delays in identification and review of policies which have a bearing on devolution.
(g)      Lack of clarity on the relationship between the National Executive and County Executives.
8.2     Development of Policies without CIC Input
 
Based on the quarterly reports submitted by the Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services, there are policies that have already been developed by the Executive without CIC’s input. These include:
 
(a)      The National Employment Policy, which was approved by Cabinet in December, 2012;
(b)     The Occupational Safety and Health Policy, which was approved by Parliament in 2012;
(c)      The Social Protection Policy developed by the Ministry of Labour and the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Development, which was approved by Cabinet in 2012.
It needs to be noted that policies too need to be aligned to the Constitution and therefore CIC should review them for consistency with the Constitution.
 
8.3     Development of Legislation that Usurps the role of Counties
For example, the National Authority for the Campaign Against Alcohol and Drug Abuse Act, 2012 establishes the National Authority for the Campaign Against Alcohol and Drug Abuse (NACADA) mandated to undertake the functions assigned to the County Government by the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution. Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (KEMSA) was established under the Kenya Medical Supplies Authority Act 2012, as a national body to undertake the function of procurement of drugs. There is need to ensure that the functions of the County Government are not usurped by the National Government. An intergovernmental mechanism should be established to address such issues.
 
8.4   Incomprehensive Bills
Acts of Parliament should give effect to the provisions of the Constitution, and due diligence should be exercised to ensure Bills are as comprehensive as possible. For example, the Consumer Protection Act, 2012 is intended to give effect to Article 46 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. However, although this Act addresses sub-articles 46(a) and (b), it does not adequately, if at all, address sub-articles 46(c) and (d). Further the Act is heavily focused on protection of consumers in specific sectors instead of adequately addressing the rights and protection measures of all consumers in all sectors.
ANNEXES
 
Annex 1A – Actions Points from the CIC and Senate Retreat, May 16 – 18, 2013
 
The Senate and Commission for Implementation of the Constitution identified the way forward as presented in the table below. This is guided by the awareness that: (i) All sovereign power belongs to the people of Kenya and the Senate consists of democratically elected representatives to represent the interests of the people of Kenya in the Counties; (ii) The Senate is a protector of the Counties which acts as a bridge between National and County Governments, a go-between County Executives and County Assemblies and also works with CRA on matters of finance; (iii) The Senate is a change agent and catalyst in the transition to the devolved system of government thus it protects the Constitution and promotes the democratic governance of the republic.

Issue


Action


Responsibility


Enhancing capacity of Senate to fulfill its role and mandate


(1) Development of a Senate Bill & manual that comprehensively articulates the role of Senate. The Bill should stress on the oversight role of the Senate including oversight over the National Assembly and the County Assemblies. 
(2)  Revision of the standing orders: The need to fast track the revision of standing orders for the Senate in order to provide for a more robust interpretation of the role of the Senate;
(3) Development of a Strategic plan: Documenting the strategic intent and identifying milestones for the Senate
(4) Capacity building of Senators: (a) Senators to familiarize themselves with the Constitution and various legislations, especially those that relate to the devolved governments structure, i.e. the County Governments Act, Transition to Devolved Governments Act, the Urban Areas and Cities Act, the Intergovernmental Relations Act and the Public Finance Management Act and (b) Buttress Infrastructure and Human Resource Support to Senators to ensure they have adequate capacity to discharge their functions


 
 
 
Rules and House Business Committee
 
 
Clerk’s Office


Strengthening Intra and inter governmental relations

         i.            County Assemblies: Strengthen engagement to ensure the legislative agenda in both the Senate and County Assemblies facilitates effective devolution. This will require: Audit of the respective standing orders to create an engagement mechanism to enhance consultation at three levels: the respective Senator & Assembly, the Committees and the individual houses
Leverage the Speaker’s forum where Senate is the patron  - Speaker’s Office



Rules and House Business Committee
Speaker’s Office


 

        ii.            Governors:  Develop structured engagement with the Governors to inform the Senate legislative agenda. This may be achieved through:Instituting a consultative forum with the Council of County Governors 
Establishing consultative forums between the respective Senator and Governor



Speaker’s Office
 
Individual Senators


 

      iii.            National Assembly: Establishing parliamentary committees to address issues affecting the national legislative agenda:Joint Loans and Grants Council - in which National and County governments are equally involved. The main object of this council should be to ensure equity of public debt by deciding how much and when Counties may borrow. The council may also set the conditions for County borrowing.
Constitutional Implementation Oversight Committee – an expanded CIOC that includes not only the National Assembly but also Parliament



 


 

      iv.            National Executive: Senate to work with the National Executive to clarify the role of National Government Officers working at the County level and in particular the County Commissioners in order to address the emerging challenges


 


Planning & Public Financial Management

         i.            Enhanced role in Budget & Debt Scrutiny: Taking part in public hearings conducted by the national assembly budget committee; establish a Senate Budget Office Budget to advise it on budget matters as this directly affects operation of county governments as well as to ensure that the debt portfolio of the country is sustainable
        ii.            County Planning - within the context of Senate’s mandate, engage in County planning.


 


Support required from CIC

         i.            Legislation review/developmentIssue advisory to Speaker’s Office on the Legislative Audit  - Finalize audit of legislation and share the report with the Senate and collate all the audited laws into one document
Prioritise review of all legislation that was passed by Parliament post 2010 that impact on devolution and in the medium term review pre 2010 legislation that impacts devolved government in the following areas:

Transfer of functions;
Parastatals and quasi-governmental organizations;
Investments and Public Asset Management;
Procurement;
Natural resources and benefits to the local communities;
Service delivery.
Intergovernmental Relations Act
Review of new Legislation, with priority proposed for the following:
Public Service Management Bill
Investments and Public Assets Management
 
        ii.            Enhance engagement with the Senate Committee – CIC to check all laws and regulations which pass through the hands of the Senate and which affect implementation of the Constitution, in fulfillment of Article 261, Sections 4 (b) and 5 (6) of the Sixth Schedule. This will need:Engagement with the Senate House Committees at pre-scrutiny and post publication stages of processing legislation.
Sharing with the Senate recommendations of the Commission on laws relating to devolution.
Regular updates by CIC to Senate on new legislation required or amendments to be made.
Development of a schedule for future regular meetings and engagements.
      iii.            Development of a manual on the role of Senate
      iv.            Support to enhanced intergovernmental relations including facilitating retreat between the Senate and the Governors as well as similar retreats with the National Assembly and National Executive; 
        v.            Share copies of all its constitutionally required reports to date with the Senate subsequently by submitting the same to the Senate.



CIC and Speaker’s Office

Annex 1B - Action Points from the CIC and Senate Retreat, June 30th - 31st 2013

Issue


Resolution


Responsibility



Transfer of Functions to Counties

 


Bearing in mind the transfer of functions needs to be guided by the Constitution and the provisions given in the Devolution Acts:
 
(i)            The process of functional analysis and unbundling of functions and the costing of these functions in line with the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution should be expedited and completed and the reports produced to guide the County Governments in planning and budgeting.
(ii)        The Council of Governors should designate County Governments’ representatives to participate in the on-going sectoral discussions on functions in the Fourth Schedule including the development/review of sectoral policies, laws, administrative and institutional framework to ensure that they are supportive of devolved governance.


CIC, TA, the Council of Governors, County Governments
 
 
 
CIC to convene sectoral meetings to facilitate these consultations
 


County Institutional Frameworks and Human Resource


(i)            Governors should issue guidelines / circulars to clarify reporting lines for seconded as well as interim staff in respect of the functions that have already been transferred to ensure that the authority of Governors and County Governments is not undermined
(ii)          County governments should fast track the establishment of County Public Service Boards and work with the relevant institutions to build their capacity to enable them to do a good job on facilitating the county human resource.
(iii)       County Governments should evaluate the human resource capacities and suitability for tasks to be undertaken.


County Governors


Intergovernmental Relations and Public Participation


(i)            The full operationalization of the Summit, the Council of County Governments, the Intergovernmental Relations Technical Committee and Secretariat, the inter-governmental budget economic council including the establishment of the required Secretariat structures.
(ii)          Policy to be developed to guide matters relating to donor funding for activities that fall under County Government jurisdictions. This should also guide on the relationship between County Governments and development partners.
(iii)       The inter-governmental mechanisms should develop a stakeholder engagement strategy including development of a matrix.


CIC
Council of Governors
 
CIC, Council of Governors
 
CIC, Council of Governors


Planning and Public Financial Management at the County Level


(i)            There is an urgent need for capacity development of County entities to understand their roles in the development of planning and public financial management. In particular, between now and the beginning of the financial year with emphasis on developing the required planning and PFM structures to ensure that they have the requisite capacity to undertake the functions of development planning, budgeting, procurement, accounting and overall financial management.
(ii)          There is need for the County Governments to identify aspects of procurement that may need to be put in County Specific policies and laws and to fast track these to guide their operations.
(iii)       That the relevant institutions should be leveraged to follow-up on the remittance of the pending funds to County Governments for the current financial year and to facilitate obtaining of necessary information to support financial management at the council level.


CIC, the National Government other relevant institutions/ County Governments
 
 
 
 
 
County Governments
 
Summit and Council


Legislative Issues


(i)            The Public Procurement and Disposal Act needs to be urgently reviewed and where necessary passage of County Specific procurement laws to be enacted to facilitate more efficient operation taking cognizance of the provisions of the national laws and the Constitution.
(ii)          There should be full operationalization of the PFM Act including utilization of the County Fiscal Strategy Paper, County Budget Review and Outlook Paper, Debt Management Strategy and Development Plan to ensure prudent management of financial resources as well as adequate resourcing of the county development agenda.
(iii)         There is need to review all laws establishing parastatals to undertake shared or devolved functions and those proposing privatization to guard against the excision of county functions to national entities and to also ensure the reflection of these bodies as inter-governmental bodies where necessary;
Review of Acts to ensure they align with the Constitution.
Work with the National Executive to identify engagement mechanisms between county governments and parastatals
Laws on concurrent functions
Laws and Regulations required on Human Resources


Council of Governors
CIC



Other Recommendations Reached


 



(i)            Organize a joint forum for Governors and Senators at the earliest convenience
(ii)          Organize such sensitization and other capacity building meetings for County Assemblies and County Executives to develop a common understanding of devolution and county legislative process.
(iii)         Work with both relevant institutions to support development of manuals to train the County Assembly and County Public Service Boards. Address gaps noted in the establishment of County Policing authority.
(iv)         Adoption of the guidelines from CIC to County Governments – a process circular to be shared following the retreat.
(v)          Develop a reporting template for County Governments on the CIC circular
(vi)      Civic education on the Constitution and devolution to be enhanced at the national level to facilitate quality engagement and informed participation by the public in processes that they will be involved in.


Council of Governors
CIC

Annex 2
Status of Enactment of Required Legislation, Policies and Administrative Procedures
A. LEGISLATION UNDER THE 5TH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION

 


Legislation


Constitutional Time Frame


Status

 


County assembly gender balance and diversity (Article 197)


August 2013


Enacted:
 Elections Act, 2011 (Section 36)

 


Public participation and county assembly powers, privileges and immunities (Article 196)


August 2013


Enacted:
 County Governments Act, 2012 (Section 17)

 


Support for county governments (Article 190)


August 2013


Enacted:
 County Governments Act, 2012 (Section 121)

 


Freedom of the media (Article 34)


August 2013


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in parliament:
 Kenya Information & Communication (Amendment) Bill, 2013 (published on 22nd July 2013)
 Media Council Bill, 2013 (published on 22nd July 2013)

 


Accounts and audit of public entities (Article 226)


August 2014


Enacted:
 Public Finance Management Act, 2012 (Sections: 80-85; 163-168; 66; 67-74; 148-156)

 


Consumer protection (Article 46)


August 2014


Enacted:
 Consumer Protection Act,  2012

 


Fair hearing (Article 50)


August 2014


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Fair administrative action (Article 47)


August 2014


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Legislation regarding environment (Article 72)


August 2014


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Procurement of public goods and services (Article 227)


August 2014


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Rights of persons detained, held in custody or detained (Article 51)


August 2014


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Values and principles of public service (Article 232)


August 2014


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Legislation in respect of culture (Article 11 (3))


August 2015


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Regulation of land use and property (Article 66)


August 2015


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Family (Article 45)


August 2015


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in parliament:
 Marriage Bill, 2013 (published on 5th July 2013)
 Matrimonial Properties Bill, 2013 (published on 5th July 2013)
 Protection Against Domestic Violence Bill, 2012.

 


Agreements relating to natural resources (Article 71)


August 2015


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Community land (Article 63)


August 2015


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Promotion of representation of marginalised groups (Article 100)


August 2015


To be developed by the National Executive

B.  OTHER LEGISLATION REQUIRED BY THE CONSTITUTION BUT NOT LISTED IN THE FIFTH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION

 


Legislation


Time Frame as Proposed by CIC


Status

 


Access to Information Bill


August 2013


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in Parliament

 


Contempt of Court  Bill


August 2013


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in Parliament

 


Controller of Budget Bill


August 2013


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in Parliament

 


Data Protection Bill


August 2013


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in Parliament

 


Election Campaign Financing Bill


August 2013


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in Parliament
(Published on 5th July 2013)

 


Magistrates Court (Amendment) Bill


August 2013


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in Parliament

 


Legal Aid Bill


December 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Mining Bill


August 2013


Submitted to the AG for publication and tabling in Parliament

 


National Coroners Service Bill


August 2013


Under review by CIC

 


National Registration and Identification of Persons Bill 2012


December 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Private Security Industries Regulation Bill


August 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Refugee Bill


December 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Kenya Food and Drugs Administration Bill


December 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Persons with Disability Bill


December 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Pharmacies Bill 


December 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Small Claims Bill


December 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Water Bill


December 2013


Under review by CIC

 


Alternative Dispute Resolution Bill


December 2013


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Bail Information and Supervision Bill


December 2013


 To be developed by the National Executive

 


Court Bailiffs Bill


December 2013


To be developed by the National Executive

 


National Social Security Trust Fund Bill


December 2013


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Petty Offenders Bill


December 2013


To be developed by the National Executive

 


State Corporations Bill


December 2013


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Legislation to provide for the composition, powers, functions & operations of the Central Bank of Kenya  (Article 231)


December 2013


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Legislation to provide for uniform norms and standards for staffing of County Governments  (Article 235)


December 2013


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Work Injuries Benefits Bill


December 2013


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Legislation  conferring powers on prosecution on authorities other than the Director of Public Prosecutions (Article 157)


August 2015


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Legislation prescribing the minimum and maximum acreage of ownership (Article 68(1)(c))


August 2015


To be developed by the National Executive

 


Legislation to establish other police services under the supervision of the Inspector-General of the Service (Article 247)


August 2015


To be developed by the National Executive

C. LEGISLATION ORIGINATING FROM PARLIAMENT (PRIVATE MEMBER BILLS)

 


Legislation


Proposed Timeline for Enactment


Status

 


Constitutional (Amendment) Bill 2013


 


Legislative proposal received on 9th July 2013 after which CIC comments on proposed amendments to Articles 89, 90, 97, 98, 136 and 180 of the Constitution submitted to the Speaker of National Assembly on 15th July 2013

 


Constitutional (Amendment) Bill 2013


 


Legislative proposal received on 9th July 2013 after which CIC comments on proposed amendments to Article 204 of the Constitution submitted to the Speaker of National Assembly on 15th July 2013

 


Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychotherapists Bill 2013


 


Under review by CIC.
Legislative proposal received on 27th June 2013
Stakeholder consultation held after which a request made to the National Assembly Department of Health to allow for amalgamation of the Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychotherapists Bill (which is a private members Bill) with the Counsellors and Psychologists Bill, the latter of which is currently with the AG.

D. LEGISLATION ENACTED AFTER 27TH AUGUST 2010

 


Legislation


Time Frame as Proposed by CIC


Legislation on Devolved Government Functions

 


Constituencies Development Fund Act, No. 30 of 2013


August 2013

 


County Governments Act, No. 17 of 2012


August 2013

 


National Government Co-ordination Act, No. 1 of 2013


August 2013

 


National Police Service Commission Act, No. 30 of 2011


August 2013

 


Transition to Devolved Government Act, No. 28 of 2013


August 2013

 


Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Authority Act, No. 13 of 2013


December 2013

 


Basic Education Act, No. 14 of 2013


December 2013

 


Crops Act, No. 16 of 2013


December 2013

 


Intergovernmental Relations Act, No. 2 of 2012


December 2013

 


Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research Act, No. 17 of 2013


December 2013

 


Kenya Medical Supplies Authority Act, No. 20 of 2013


December 2013

 


Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service Act, No. 54 of 2012


December 2013

 


Office of the Attorney General Act, No. 49 of 2012


December 2013

 


Office of the Director of Public Prosecution Act, No. 2 of 2013


December 2013

 


Public Service Commission Act, No. 13 of 2012


December 2013

 


Pyrethrum Act, No. 22 of 2013


December 2013

 


Urban Areas and Cities Act, No. 13 of 2011


December 2013

 


Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development Act, No. 4 of 2013


August 2014

 


Kenya National Examinations Council Act, No. 29 of 2012


August 2014

 


Leadership and Integrity Act, No. 19 of 2012


August 2014

 


Science, Technology and Innovation Act, No. 28 of 2013


August 2014

 


Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act, No. 29 of 2013


August 2014

 


Universities Act, No. 42 of 2012


August 2014

 


Breast Milk Substitutes (Regulation and Control) Act, No. 34 of 2012


December 2014

 


Cancer Prevention and Control Act, No. 15 of 2012


December 2014

 


Social Assistance Act, No. 24 of 2013


December 2014

 


National Construction Authority Act, No. 41 of 2011


August 2015

 


National Transport and Safety Authority Act, No. 33 of 2012


August 2015

 


Sports Act, No. 25 of 2013


August 2015

 


Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Para-Professionals Act, No. 29 of 2011


August 2015

 


National Authority for the Campaign Against Alcohol and Drug Abuse, No. 12 of 2012


December 2015


Other Legislation Requiring Review

 


Elections Act, No. 24 of 2011


August 2014

 


Petitions to Parliament (Procedure) Act, No. 22 of 2012


August 2014

 


Political Parties Act, No. 11 of 2011


August 2014

E. LEGISLATION ENACTED BEFORE 27TH AUGUST 2010
All legislation enacted before the promulgation of the Constitution on 27th August 2010 should be reviewed to ensure compliance with the letter and spirit of the Constitution.

F.  NATIONAL POLICIES TO PROVIDE A FRAMEWORK FOR LEGISLATION & ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES

4TH SCHEDULE POLICIES

 


Agricultural Policy

 


Education Policy

 


Energy Policy

 


Foreign Policy

 


Health Policy

 


Housing Policy

 


Language Policy

 


Monetary Policy

 


National Economic and Planning Policy

 


National Land Policy

 


National Public Works Policy

 


Policies on Environmental and Natural Resources

 


Policies on Labour

 


Policies on the Regulation of Banking, Insurance and Financial Corporations

 


Policy on Capacity Building and Technical Assistance to Counties

 


Policy on Disaster Management

 


Public Investment Policy

 


Tourism Policy

 


Transport and Communications Policy

 


Veterinary Policy


OTHER POLICIES TO IMPLEMENT THE CONSTITUTION

 


Legal Aid Policy (Article 48)

 


Mining Policy

 


National Defence Policy

 


National Security Policy (Article 240)

 


Policing Policy (Article 245)

 


Policy on Access to Justice (Article 48)

 


Policy on Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanisms (Article 159)

 


Policy on Equity and Affirmative Measures (Article 27)

 


Policy on Public Participation (Article 10)

 


Policy on Social Security (Article 43(3))

 


Policy on Socio-Economic Rights (Article 21 and 43)

 


Policy on the restructuring of the system of government commonly known as provincial administration (Section 17 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution)

 


Water Policy (Article 43(1))

G. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES TO OPERATIONALIZE ACTS

 


Administrative Procedures


Time Frame as Proposed by CIC

 


Regulations required under the Land Act


August 2015

 


Regulation required under the National Land Commission Act


August 2015

 


Regulations required under the Land Registration Act 


August 2015

 


Regulations required under the Mining Bill upon enactment


August 2015

 


Regulations on Values and Principles of Public Service


August 2015

 


Regulations on Fair Administrative Action


August 2015

 


Regulations on Leadership & Integrity 


August 2015

 


Institutional framework – full operationalization of EACC


August 2015

 


Regulations under sections 124, 125 and 128 of the National Police Service Act


August 2015

 


Regulations required under the National Intelligence Service Act


August 2015

 


Regulations required under section 304 of the  Kenya Defence Forces Act


August 2015

 


Regulations required under section 35  the Power of Mercy Act


August 2015

 


Regulations under the National Police Service Commission Act


August 2015

 


Regulations required under section 39 the Independent Policing Oversight Authority


August 2015

 


Regulations required under section 20 of the National Government Co-ordination Act


August 2015

 


Guidelines on the relationship and affairs of the Cabinet and Committee of Principal Secretaries


August 2015

 


Regulations required under section 17 of the National Security Council Act


August 2015

 


Regulations required under the Attorney-General Office Act


August 2015

 


Regulations required under the Office of the Director of Public Prosecution Act


August 2015

 


County Government General Regulations


August 2015

 


Urban Areas and Cities General Regulations


August 2015

 


Intergovernmental Relations General Regulations


August 2015

 


Transition to Devolved Government General Regulation


August 2015

 


Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act, 2013 (Regulations to give effect to Sections 18, 26, 29 and 57)


August 2015

 


Legal Education Act, 2012 (Regulations to give effect to Sections 8(3), 42(3) and 46)


August 2015

 


Basic Education Act, 2013 (Regulations to give effect to Sections 22, 33, 34, 35, 42, 45, 53, 54, 57, 63, 64, 65, 69, 72, 73, 81, 83, 84, 90, 93, 95, 101)


August 2015

 


Kenya School of Law Act, 2012 (Regulations to give effect to Section 5 and 28)


August 2015

 


Kenya School of Government Act, 2012 (Regulations to give effect to Section 20)


August 2015

 


Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development Act, 2013 (Regulations to give effect to Section 29)


August 2015

 


Universities Act, 2013 (Regulations to give effect to Sections: 19, 20, 22, 23 and 70)


August 2015

 


Science, Technology and Innovation Act, 2013 (Regulations to give effect to Sections 6, 14 and 45)


August 2015

 


National Construction Authority, 2011 (Regulations to give effect to Sections: 18(5), 31, 42)


August 2015

 


National Transport and Safety Authority, 2012 (Regulations to give effect to Sections 54)


August 2015

 


Public Finance Management Act, 2012 (Regulations to give effect to Sections: 4, 5, 12, 15, 21, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 36, 38, 43, 48, 50, 53, 56, 57, 59, 69, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 77, 86, 96, 101, 107, 112, 120, 127, 139, 141, 144, 146, 149, 150, 154, 155, 156, 160, 178, 182, 1887, 200, 201, 205 and 207)


August 2015

 


Civil Procedure Rules (Article 48)


August 2015

H. ACTIVITIES RELATED TO MONITORING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SYSTEM OF DEVOLVED GOVERNMENT 
 


Engagement with County Executives and Assemblies to facilitate and oversee the development of County policies legislation, administrative procedures and institutional frameworks to the implementation the system of devolved government;

 


Engagement with the National Executive and national assembly, and the senate to facilitate development of national policies, legislation, administrative procedures and frameworks to give effect to the implementation of devolved system government;

 


Engagement with the County public service boards and County assembly boards to ensure implementation of the principles of equity, equality and the two-third gender balance in appointive positions;

 


Issuance of advisories on matters relating to implementation of the Constitution and system of devolved government;

 


Monitoring of the development of transition plans;

 


Monitoring of the sharing of assets and liabilities;

 


Monitoring of the effective transfer of functions;

 


Monitoring of the organizational  and institutional development of County governments;

 


Monitoring of the implementation of transition plans;

 


Monitoring of capacity building of County Governments;

 


Review of legislation relating to devolution;

 


Reviewing and advising on quarterly reports generated by the Transition Authority;

 


Preparation and submission of quarterly reports to Committee on the Implementation of the Constitution and Office of the President;

Annex 3
Legislation Enacted by Parliament after the Promulgation of the Constitution

2010
Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution Act (No 9 of 2010)
Animal Technicians Act (No. 11 of 2010)
Competition Act (No.12 of 2010)


2011
4.                    Commission of Administrative Justice Act (No. 23 of 2011)
5.                    Commission on Revenue Allocation Act (No. 16 of 2011)
6.                    Elections Acts Act (No. 24 of 2011)
Engineers Act (No. 43 of 2011)
8.                    Environment and Land Court Act (No. 19 of 2011)
9.                    Ethnics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act (No. 22 of 2011)
10.                 Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (No. 9 of 2011)
11.                 Independent Offices Appointment Act (No. 8 of 2011)
12.                 Independent Policing Oversight Authority Act (No. 35 of 2011)
13.                 Industrial Court Act (No. 20 of 2011)
14.                 Judicial Service Act (No. 1 of 2011)
15.                 Kenya Citizenship and Immigration Act (No. 12 of 2011)
16.                 Kenya Citizens and Foreign Nationals Management Service Act (No. 31 of 2011)
17.                 Kenya National Commission on Human Rights Act (No. 14 of 2011)
Limited Liability Partnership Act (No. 42 of 2011)
Mutual Legal Assistance Act (No. 36 of 2011)
National Construction Authority Act (No. 41 of 2011)
21.                 National Gender and Equality Commission Act (No. 15 of 2011)
National Government Loans Guarantee Act (No. 18 of  2011)
National Payment System Act (No. 39 of 2011)
24.                 National Police Service Commission Act (No. 30 of 2011)
25.                 National Police Service Act (No. 11A of 2011)
26.                 Political Parties Act (No. 11 of 2011)
27.                 Power of Mercy Act (No. 21 of 2011)
Price Control (Essential Goods) Act (No. 26 of 2011)
Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act (No. 32 of 2011)
Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) Act, 2011 (No. 33 of 2011)
31.                 Salaries and Remuneration Commission Act (No. 10 of 2011)
Tourism Act (No. 28 of 2011)
Unclaimed Financial Assets Act (No. 40 of 2011)
34.                 Urban Areas and Cities Act (No. 13 of 2011)
35.                 Vetting of Judges and Magistrates Act (No. 2 of 2011)
Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Para-Professionals Act (No. 29 of 2011)


 


2012
Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 11 of 2012)
Assumption of the Office of the President Act (No. 21 of 2012)
Breast Milk Substitutes (Regulation and Control) Act (No. 34 of 2012)
Cancer Prevention and Control Act (No. 15 of 2012)
41.                 Consumer Protection Act (No. 46 of 2012)
42.                 County Governments Act (No. 17 of 2012)
Finance Act (No. 4 of 2012)
Finance Act (No. 57 of 2012)
45.                 Intergovernmental Relations Act (No. 2 of 2012)
46.                 Kenya Defense Forces Act (No. 25 of 2012)
Kenya Deposit Insurance Act (No. 10 of 2012)
Kenya Examinations Council Act (No. 29 of 2012)
Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service Act (No. 54 of 2012)
Kenya School of Government Act (No. 9 of 2012)
Kenya School of Law Act (No. 26 of 2012)
52.                 Land Act (No. 6 of 2012)
53.                 Land Registration Act (No. 3 of 2012)
54.                 Leadership and Integrity Act (No. 19 of 2012)
Legal Education Act (No. 27 of 2012)
National Authority for the Campaign against Alcohol and Drug Abuse Act (No. 14 of 2012)
57.                 National Intelligence Service Act (No. 28 of 2012)
58.                 National Land Commission Act (No. 5 of 2012)
 

59.                 National Security Council Act (No. 23 of 2012)
National Transport and Safety Authority Act (No. 33 of 2012)
61.                 Office of the Attorney-General Act (No. 49 of 2012)
Partnerships Act, 2012 (No. 16 of 2012)
63.                 Petitions to the Parliament (Procedure) Act (No. 22 of 2012)
Prevention, Protection and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and Affected Communities Act, 2012 (No. 56 of 2012)
Prevention of Terrorism Act (No 30 of 2012)
66.                 Public Finance Management Act, 2012 (18 of 2012)
67.                 Public Service Commission Act (No. 13 of 2012)
Public Service Superannuation Scheme Act (No. 8 of 2012)
Publication of Electoral Opinion Polls Act (No. 39 of 2012)
Statute Law Miscellaneous Act (No. 12 of 2012)
Supplementary Appropriation Act (No. 7 of 2012)
72.                 Teachers Service Commission Act (No. 20 of 2012)
73.                 Transition to Devolved Government Act (No. 1 of 2012)
74.                 Treaty Making and Ratification Act (No. 45 of 2012)Universities Act (No. 42 of 2012)



2013
76.                 County Governments Public Finance Management Transition Act (No. 8 of 2013)
Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development Act (No. 4 of 2013)
The National Commission of for UNESCO Act (No. 5 of 2013)
National Honours Act (No 11 of 2013)
80.                 National Government Co-ordination Act (No. 1 of 2013)
81.                 Office of the Director of Public Prosecution Act (No. 2 of 2013)
Public Health Officers Act (No. 12 of 2013)
Supplementary Appropriation Act (No. 3 of 2013)
84.                 Transition County Allocation of Revenue Act (No. 5 of 2013)
85.                 Transition County Appropriation Act (No. 6 of 2013)


Amendment Acts
2010
Commissions of Inquiry (Amendment) Act, (No. 5 of 2010)
Witness Protection (Amendment) Act, (No. 2 of 2010)
Finance Act, (No. 10 of 2010)
2011
Capital Markets (Amendment) Act, (No. 37 of 2011)
Central Depositories (Amendment) Act, (No. 38 of 2011)
Industrial Training (Amendment) Act, (No. 34 of 2011)
Nurses (Amendment) Act, (No. 27 of 2011)
Tea (Amendment) Act, (No. 4 of 2011)
Traffic (Amendment) Act, (No. 3 of 2011)
Vetting of Judges and Magistrates (Amendment) Act, (No. 6 of 2011)


2012
Capital Markets (Amendment) Act, (No. 35 of 2012)
Central Bank of Kenya (Amendment) Act, (No. 36 of 2012)
Elections (Amendment) Act, (No. 31 of 2012)
Elections (Amendment) No. 2 Act, (No. 32 of 2012)
Elections (Amendment) No. 3 Act, (No. 48 of 2012)
Judicature (Amendment) Act, (No. 10A of 2012)
Political Parties (Amendment) Act, (No. 50 of 2012)
 

Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, (No. 51 of 2012)
Seed and Plant Varieties (Amendment) Act, 2012 (No. 53 of 2012)
Statute Law Miscellaneous (Amendment) Act, (No. 2 of 2012)
Traffic (Amendment) Act, (No. 37 of 2012)
Traffic (Amendment) No. 2 Act, (No. 38 of 2012)
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation (Amendment) Act, (No. 44 of 2012)
Vetting of Judges and Magistrates (Amendment) Act, (No 43 of 2012


2013
Customs and Excise (Amendment) Act, (No. 10 of 2013)
Presidential Retirement Benefits (Amendment) Act, (No. 9 of 2013)

 
*The Acts in italics were developed in consultation with the Commission
Annex 4
Public Advisories
1.        Advisory on Transfer of Functions from the National to County Governments
CIC mandate: The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (CIC) is mandated, under Section 15 (2) (d) of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution to monitor the implementation of the system of devolved government effectively. It is in this respect that CIC issues the following advisory on the transfer of functions.
Delivery of Services under The Constitution of Kenya 2010: The Constitution of Kenya (CoK) 2010 heralded a new era for Kenya that focuses on efficient, effective and equitable delivery of services to the sovereign people of Kenya while correcting historical injustices. The devolved system of government as set out in Articles 6 and 189 of the Constitution promises Kenyans provision of proximate, easily accessible services throughout Kenya.
To realize this aspiration, CoK 2010 provided a transition period that would allow the County governments the space to plan and develop the requisite systems and structures before the functions listed in the 4th schedule could be transferred to them. Section 15 of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution requires that there would be legislation by Parliament that would:
(i)       Make provision for the phased transfer of functions from the national government to the county government, over a period of three years, from the date of the first general elections under the CoK 2010;
(ii)     Establish criteria that must be met before particular functions are devolved to County governments to ensure that County governments are not given functions which they cannot perform;
(iii)    Permit the asymmetrical devolution of powers to ensure that functions are devolved promptly to Counties that have the capacity to perform them but that no County is given functions it cannot perform.
Pursuant to Section 15, Parliament enacted the Transition to Devolved Government (TDG) Act, 2012. The legislation established the Transition Authority (TA) and mandates it to carry out the following key activities required to facilitate the preparations for the transfer of functions:
(i)       The analysis and unbundling of the functions set out in the 4th Schedule of the Constitution
(ii)     Determination of the resource requirements (costing) for each of the functions to ensure reasonable funding for effective delivery of services
(iii)    Preparation and validation of an inventory of all the existing assets and liabilities of government, and the development of criteria to determine the transfer of assets, liabilities and staff of the central government and local authorities
The reason for these prerequisites was the recognition that if the transfer of functions was not carried out properly, County governments would end up being saddled with functions which they had not planned for (as distinct governments) and therefore not perform these functions effectively. This would undermine devolution.
Criteria for the Transfer of Functions: Section 15 of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution requires phased transfer of functions according to criteria set out by legislation. The Transition to Devolved Government Act 2012 provides the criteria to be met before functions are to be transferred from the National Government level to a County Government level, to ensure that the process is seamless, effective and lawful.
Other than the first set of functions transferred in February 2013, the transfer of the remaining Fourth Schedule functions is required to comply with the following:
(i)       That a county government having met the criteria (as specified below) referred to by Section 15 of the Sixth Schedule and specified in Section 24 of the TDG Act, applies to TA for the transfer of the function(s).
(ii)     That TA, upon receipt of the request, determines whether the County government meets the criteria set out under Section 24 of the TA Act, and therefore qualifies for the transfer of the function(s).
(iii)    That when TA determines, based on the criteria under section 24 of the TDG Act, that the county government does not meet the criteria for the transfer of a function(s), TA shall propose clear and practical measures to build the capacity of the County Government to enable the government take over the functions within the shortest time possible: and
(iv)    That a County Government may appeal to the Senate against a decision made by TA.
Criteria to be fulfilled for the transfer of functions as Specified in the Transition to Devolved Government (TDG) Act
At a minimum, the following are the criteria each County Government MUST fulfill in readiness for the transfer of functions from the national government;
(i)       Put in place legislation relating to the function applied for;
(ii)     Put in place a framework for service delivery to implement the functions;
(iii)    Where applicable, identify or establish administrative units related to the function;
(iv)    Have undertaken capacity assessment in relation to the function;
(v)     Have arrangement for and the extent of further decentralization of the function and provision of related services by the County Government;
(vi)    Have the required infrastructure and systems to deliver the function;
(vii)  Have the necessary financial management systems in place;
(viii) Have an approved plan in relation to the function, and
(ix)    Fulfill any other variable as may be prescribed after consultations between TA, CIC and CRA.
The criteria must be complied with and any variation from it is a violation of the law and Constitution. This public notification is to alert the public and all agencies that;
(i)           Any transfer of a function(s) from the National government to a county government, without going through the above process is in violation of the Constitution;
(ii)         Steps must be taken to ensure that the necessary arrangements are in place to protect service delivery and ensure that the Counties are able to take up their functions as quickly as possible but within the letter and spirit of the law.
In Conclusion: CIC believes that it is critical that County governments take over their functions as early as possible. To this end, CIC will continue to work with relevant State organs and other stakeholders to ensure that there is urgent transfer of functions but that the transfer is effective and protective of service delivery and is in the interests of the residents of the Counties.
In its monitoring role, CIC is concerned and has expressed its concern to all relevant agencies on the hurried and sometimes ad hoc manner in which the process is being carried out so far. CIC believes that this has the potential to compromise devolution and must be re-thought and restructured so that it complies with the letter and sprit of the Constitution and law. We urge the various players to respect, promote, observe and protect the letter and spirit of the Constitution, as they took oath to do. We also specifically call upon the Senate to play its role of protecting the Counties and County Governments, by ensuring that they get sufficient funding for the legally transferred functions, together with ensuring that the transition process is seamless.
CIC wishes to remind all State organs, pubic officers and the people of Kenya that:
(i)       Any public officer or State organs who transfers functions without respecting the process laid down by the Constitution and law violates the Constitution, meaning that the transfer will be unconstitutional;
(ii)     The public officers involved in the unconstitutional transfer of functions shall be held accountable, and;
(iii)    County Governments risk suspension in the event that they fail to perform the functions transferred to them.
CIC continues to jealously guard and remain truthful to what the people of Kenya wished and voted for in the 2010 referendum and will continue to faithfully discharge its mandate and to promote constitutionalism and calls on all agencies to do the same.
2.        CIC Statement on the Role of Senate in Revenue Bills and on Salaries of MPs
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution is mandated by the Constitution to monitor, facilitate and oversee the development of legislation and administrative procedures required to implement the Constitution, and to monitor the effective implementation of the system of devolved government. Additionally, along with other constitutional commissions and independent offices, CIC is expected to secure the observance by all State Organs of democratic values and principles and to promote constitutionalism.
In pursuit of its mandate, CIC wishes to advice the people of Kenya on the debates by Parliament regarding the involvement of the Senate in the consideration and passage of the Division of Revenue Bill, 2013 and the on-going spirited campaign by the National Assembly against the Salaries and Remuneration Commission (SRC) and other Constitutional Commissions.
3.        Salaries of Members of Parliament as Set by The Salaries and Remuneration Commission
The mandate of SRC with regards to State officers as set out in Article 230(4) of the Constitution is to “set and regularly review the remuneration and benefits of all State officers”. The Constitution lists Members of the National Assembly and the Senate as State officers and as such, their salaries must be set by SRC. Pursuant to this constitutional mandate, SRC set the salaries of all State officers and publicized the information via a Gazette Notice, No. 2285-2288 of March 2013.
It is important to note that the demand for an independent body to set the salaries and benefits of State officers arose from a concern that conflicts of interest were inevitable when institutions in the public service were setting salaries, benefits and remuneration for themselves and staff of peer institutions. CIC therefore strongly feels that calling for the disbandment of the SRC is ill-advised, and that there are other avenues that members of the National Assembly can pursue in resolving the conflict over their salaries and benefits. Threats to annul the gazette notice on the salaries and benefits of all State officers will also not resolve the issue. IT IS IMPORTANT TO REALIZE THAT SRC IS NOT REQUIRED BY THE CONSTITUTION TO GAZETTE THE SALARIES AND BENEFITS OF STATE OFFICERS TO MAKE THEM EFFECTIVE, SRC JUST CHOSE THE MODE OF GAZETTMENT IN GOOD FAITH FOR PUBLIC INFORMATION. Quashing the gazette notices is therefore of no effect as the new salaries and benefits are already set and communicated to the institutions responsible for paying salaries and benefits. Furthermore the National Assembly Remuneration Act cannot be the basis of paying MPs salaries and benefits since under Article 2(4) it is void to the extent that it is inconsistent with Article 230(1) of the Constitution. In any event as MPs arrange to vote on the motion on quashing the gazette notice, they should note the provisions of Article 122(3) which provides that “a member shall not vote on any question in which the member has a pecuniary interest.”
We also wish to draw attention to all institutions responsible for paying salaries and benefits to State officers that under Article 226(5), any public Officer who makes an unlawful payment of a salary and/or benefit to a State officer contrary to the determination by SRC will be personally responsible for making good the loss occasioned by such illegal payment.
CIC recognizes that Members of the National Assembly, and indeed, other State officers are well within their rights to demand for a review of their salaries and benefits if not satisfied with the proposals by the SRC. CIC urges members of the National Assembly and other dissatisfied State Officers to engage in dialogue with the SRC (in which MPs are actually represented) while respecting the mandate of the Commission as set out in the Constitution. 
4.        Legislative Process of the Division of Revenue Bill
CIC notes with great concern the on-going supremacy for power debate between the National Assembly and the Senate, especially with regard to its effect on the Division of Revenue Bill.  A difference of opinion has arisen between the two Houses of Parliament on whether the Senate should be involved in the deliberation of this critical Bill or if this should be a privilege of the National Assembly Only. 
CIC’s opinion guided by the Constitutional provisions is as follows:
Article 94 (4) of the Constitution obligates Parliament as a whole to protect the Constitution and promote the democratic governance of the Republic. Article 96 of the Constitution sets out the Role of the Senate to include representing and protecting the interests of Counties and considering, debating and approving Bills concerning Counties. Article 110 of the Constitution defines ‘Bills concerning counties’ as including a Bill containing provisions affecting the finances of County governments. Article 218 of the Constitution indeed requires the Division of Revenue Bill to be introduced in Parliament (National Assembly and Senate). Therefore, although Article 95(4)(a) of the Constitution mandates the National Assembly to determine the allocation of national revenue between the levels of governments, this provision must be read in tandem with the provisions of Articles 94, 96, 110 and 218 of the Constitution, which recognise the concurrent role of the Senate in this legislative process that so directly affects the counties.
In light of the above constitutional provisions, it is clear that the Senate must be involved in the approval of the Division of Revenue Bill.  It would indeed be preposterous to imagine that the Senate, whilst established to look after the interests of Counties has no say in the Bill determining how much money goes to the Counties!
In order to prevent detrimental consequences of disputes that could arise between the two Houses of Parliament, the Constitution has set out various dispute resolution mechanisms, including the formation of mediation committees by the two houses. CIC therefore calls for consultations and cooperation between the National Assembly and the Senate using the laid down mediation mechanisms. That is the spirit of the Constitution and the expectation of the people of Kenya.
CONCLUSION: CIC takes note of the increasing negative tone in public debate in the recent past, whereby there has been increased belittling of various State organs perceived to threaten given interests. The effective exercise of each State organ’s mandate calls for collaboration between State organs while using laid down procedures to resolve any arising disputes. State Officers must recognize that the authority assigned to them is a public trust to be exercised in a manner that brings honour to the nation and dignity and respectability to the office.
CIC therefore calls for selfless service based solely on the public interest and in a way which avoids demeaning the offices that State Officers hold.  CIC also calls on all State organs and officers to uphold, respect, and defend the Constitution of Kenya at all times.
5.        Statement by the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution on the Resolution by the National Assembly Regarding The Setting Of Remuneration And Benefits Of State Officers
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution is mandated to monitor, co-ordinate, facilitate and oversee the implementation of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. In common with other Commissions and independent offices established under the Constitution, CIC has the objects of;
(a)      Protecting the sovereignty of the people;
(b)     Ensuring the observance by all state organs of democratic values and principles; and
(c)      Promoting constitutionalism.
Pursuant to its mandate, CIC wishes to issue the following advisory to the people of Kenya regarding the decision by the National Assembly on 28th May, 2013, to adopt the report of its Committee on Delegated Legislation. In adopting that report, the National Assembly resolved to revoke the Gazette Notices 2885, 2886, 2887 and 2888 published by the Salaries and Remuneration Commission on 1st March, 2013.
CIC is concerned that in proceeding to vote on the subject resolution, which clearly was a question that members of the National Assembly individually had, a pecuniary interest, the express provision of Article 122(3) was not respected. Article 122(3) provides:- “ a member shall not vote on any question in which the member has a pecuniary interest”.
CIC also notes the provisions of Sections 16(9)(a) and (10) of the Leadership and Integrity Act, which provides as follows:
9. Subject to Article 116(3) and (4) of the Constitution, a member of Parliament or a member of a county assembly shall declare any direct pecuniary interest or benefit of whatever nature in any-
(a) debate or proceeding of the body of which he or she is a member;
(10) for purposes of subsection (9), the Clerk of the Senate, the National Assembly or a county assembly shall maintain a register of conflicts of interest, which shall be open to the public for inspection.
Article 230 of the Constitution establishes the Salaries and Remuneration Commission and the functions of the Commission are set out in Article 230(4) of the Constitution as follows:-
“The powers and functions of the Salaries and Remuneration Commission shall be to-
(a)      set and regularly review the remuneration and benefits of all State Officers; and
(b)     advise the national and county governments on the remuneration and benefits of all other public officers.
Article 230(5) requires that: “In performing its functions, the Commission shall take the following principles into account-
(a)      the need to ensure that the total public compensation bill is fiscally sustainable;
(b)     the need to ensure that the public services are able to attract and retain the skills required to execute their functions;
(c)      the need to recognise productivity and performance; and
(d)     transparency and fairness.
When therefore, SRC set the remuneration and benefits of State Officers and communicated the same inter alia through the said Gazette Notices, those terms became effective. Thereafter, those terms can only be changed by SRC itself reviewing them, or pursuant to judicial intervention. The National Assembly Remuneration Act is not applicable, to the extent of any inconsistency with the Constitution (Article 2(4) and Section 7 of the Sixth Schedule).
In the considered opinion of CIC therefore, the action of the National Assembly to revoke the said Gazette Notices, is of no legal effect or consequence in so far as the terms set by SRC for State Officers are concerned.
Following the decision of the National Assembly, CIC finds it necessary and appropriate to once again make reference to Article 226(5) of the Constitution which provides:-
“if the holder of a public office, including a political office, directs or approves the use of public funds contrary to law or instructions, the person is liable for any loss arising from that use and shall make good the loss, whether the person remains the holder of the office or not”.
CIC wishes to further point out that as regards the discharge of its mandate, SRC is not subject to direction or approval of any other body or organ, (Article 249(2)(b)). In particular, the provision of Section 26 of the Salaries and Remuneration Act, 2011 that, “The power to make regulations shall be observed only after a draft of the proposed regulations have been approved by the National Assembly”, does not and cannot give to the National Assembly any, power or authority to oversee the substantive discharge by SRC of its core mandate. Section 26 refers to operational regulations of the Commission. Any other purported interpretation leads to the absurdity of a statutory provision negating an express provision of the Constitution.
CIC has today written to the Secretary of the Parliamentary Service Commission, the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury, the Controller of Budget and the Attorney General, urging that the Constitution be fully respected.
In the event that any moneys are paid to any State Officer as remuneration or a benefit, other than in accordance with the terms set by SRC in the discharge of its constitutional mandate:-
CIC will institute proceedings in court against any public officer who approves, makes or facilitate such payment. Such proceedings will include an application for an order that such public officer is guilty of abuse of office and should be declared not eligible to hold public office.
Any monies paid as remuneration or a benefit to a state officer other than in accordance with the terms set by SRC will be recoverable from such state officer individually.
CIC urges that all constitutional bodies and the holders of State Offices be at the forefront of upholding, protecting and defending the Constitution. In the case of State Officers this is no more than they have undertaken in their respective Oaths of Office.
CIC reaffirms its commitment to the people of Kenya to work with all other offices, institutions and state organs, to protect the Constitution and ensure its full and faithful implementation in letter and in spirit.
Charles Nyachae
CHAIRPERSON
29th May, 2013
6.        Constituencies Development Fund (CDF) Act, 2013 is unconstitutional
CIC mandate
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (CIC) is mandated, inter alia to monitor, facilitate and oversee the development of legislation and to monitor the implementation of the system of devolved government effectively.
In pursuance of its mandate, CIC has reviewed the CDF Act 2013, which though having implications on the devolved government, was not availed to the CIC for audit as required by the Constitution prior to its enactment by the 10thParliament.
CIC would like to issue the following opinion on the unconstitutionality of the CDF Act 2013 to the public in view of the impending operationalization of the Act.
The Act does not respect the constitutional division of functions between the County and National Governments
CDF was a central government fiscal decentralization mechanism; its continuation after 4th March 2013 requires review to accord with the devolved system of government. In this regard, the Constitution under Article 6 creates two levels of government and (under the Fourth Schedule) allocates different functions to each level of government. Any projects that relate to functions within the exclusive competence of the County Government cannot be undertaken by an entity created and managed through the National government frameworks, in the manner provided for by the CDF Act. If the National Government desires to create a fund through which it carries out programs in the counties, these can only be in relation to functions assigned to the National Government by the Constitution.
The Act does not respect the principle of separation of powers between the Legislature and the Executive, contrary to one of the key principles of The Constitution of Kenya 2010. 
The principle of separation of roles between the Legislative assemblies and the Executive must be respected by and at both levels of government. The National Assembly’s role is to legislate and play an oversight role and should not be engaged in implementation of projects as suggested by the CDF Act 2013. This would lead to conflict of interest as the National Assembly would then be auditing projects and programs that it was involved in implementing.
The Act offends Article 202(2) of the Constitution on conditional and unconditional Grants
Under Section 4(1)(c) of the CDF Act – the monies to be disbursed to the Fund are to be paid by the national government through the CDF Board to constituencies as a grant to be channeled to the constituencies in the manner provided for under the Act.
Under Section 4(2) the monies allocated under the CDF Act are stated to be additional revenue to the County Governments under article 202(2) of the Constitution that provides that:
“ County governments may be given additional allocations from the national government’s share of the revenue, either conditionally or unconditionally”.
The Constitution is therefore very clear that the grants as conceived under 202 (2) can only be made to County governments and not entities created in a sub county framework.
In disbursing the monies directly to the Fund and then to constituencies, hence bypassing the County Governments, the Act contravenes the clear provisions of Article 202(2) of the Constitution. If the National government decides to disburse any of its allocation for development of the constituencies as contemplated by the Act, the monies would have to be channeled through the County governments subject to such conditionalities as the National Government, or the law may determine.
The Act does not respect the provisions of Division of Revenue under Article 202 and 218 of the Constitution.
Article 202 and 218 of the Constitution requires that all revenues raised nationally be divided between the National and County Governments on the basis of the criteria set out in Article 203. Section 4(a) of the CDF Act 2013 implies that the monies accruing to the Fund will be deducted from the revenue raised nationally before distribution of the funds to the two levels of government. This is unconstitutional.
The Act would need to unequivocally state that monies accruing to the Fund will be sourced from National Government share of allocated revenue if the intention is for the National Government to provide grants to the sub-counties (Constituencies). As stated above even then consultations with the County governments are necessary unless the fund will only be used to fund national government functions at this level. An additional issue would still arise as to whether Parliament can by law limit the National Government’s discretion under Article 202(2) as to how to allocate conditional and unconditional grants.  
The Act Ignores the Planning and Budgeting for Functions by Each Level of Government required under Article
Each level of government has been given functions by the Constitution of Kenya 2010. Prior to carrying out its functions the constitution under Article 220 and the PFM Act and County Governments Act require an inclusive process of integrated planning from which a budget is formulated. The planning process includes long and medium term identification of projects, their rationalization and prioritization and the approval of the plans by the respective assemblies. In addition, the County Government Act 2012 also stipulates the process relating to the identification of projects, including the development ones, to be implemented at the county level.
The planning process provided for under the CDF Act runs parallel and counter to this process and can lead to duplication of projects and consequent misuse and misapplication of public resources. The Act even creates an emergency Fund despite the existence of a County Emergency Fund established under the PFM Act. The linkages and rationalization between the operations of these two funds is not provided for and may lead to duplication, conflicts in operationalization and possible loss of public monies. 
Will the People of Kenya Lose Out if The CDF Act 2013 Is Repealed?
The Answer is No.
It is possible for the National Government or the county governments to fund units within the Counties provided that the funding respects and accords with the system of devolved government. County governments can also establish development funds similar to CDF at any of the county units of decentralization. In fact the county government can create as many development funds and at as many levels, sub-county (constituency), ward, village and any other lower level it may choose, as appropriate and nothing stops the National government from allocating grants to those units through the County government.
CONCLUSION: The CDF Act 2013 contains provisions that fundamentally undermine the Constitution of Kenya 2010 and in particular the devolved government system. CIC recommends that the implementation of the CDF Act 2013 be halted and the Act be reviewed after discussions among all relevant stakeholders on the issues raised in this brief including the need to respect and facilitate devolution, respect the constitutional principle on separation of powers and other provisions of the constitution. 
We would like to call upon all the State players including the National Executive institutions, the National Assembly, the Senate, the County Governments and all the Kenyan people to be at the forefront in facilitating effective implementation of the letter and spirit of all provisions of the Constitution particularly those on devolved governance.  
Failure to do this will lead to unnecessary conflicts, wastage of public funds and disharmony in the process of implementation of the constitution.
CIC will continue to support all agencies, institutions and individuals that facilitate the full and effective implementation of the constitution of Kenya.
CHARLES NYACHAE,
Chairperson.

