
				Page: 10GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  9647
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED WASTE MANAGEMENT PROJECT ON L.R.NO. ISMARA/LEMEK/1595 AT AITONG, CENTRE, NAROK COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Mara North Conservancy) is proposing to establish a waste management centre on L.R.No. Ismara/Lemek/1595 at Aitong, Centre, Narok County
The proposed project facilities at the waste holding (transfer) centre will include:
Waste segregation area.
Cubicles for holding segregated wastes.
Perimeter fence with gate.
Metal container providing  small office and store for tools and equipment.
Toilets.
Water storage tank and tap.
Shed acting as meeting area.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Aspect


Potential Environmental, socio-economic, Health and Safety Impact


Mitigation measures
 


Removal of soil and vegetation
 


Soil disturbance, soil erosion, adverse health impacts from dust
 


Ensure minimal digging
Limit excavation to marked project areas
Refilling and paving to limit impacts on soil
Plant cover vegetation in all open spaces and along perimeter fence


Generation of solid waste
 


Adverse public health and safety impacts; adverse aesthetic, adverse impacts on wildlife/animal health 


Obtain necessary licenses from NEMA for waste transportation vehicle and for operating a waste disposal site
Adhere to waste segregation plan
Comply with EMCA waste regulations
Sensitize community on waste minimization, reuse and segregation at source
Ensure waste area is out of bounds for unauthorized persons, livestock and wildlife


Manual handling, contact with waste, accidental injuries during waste handling


Occupational safety and health impacts including accidents and diseases


Sensitize waste handlers and community members on occupational safety and health
Adhere to provisions of OSHA 2007 and to the Public Health Act, 2007
Develop and implement safe working procedures
Provide appropriate personal protective equipment to workers.
Provide a first aid box on site and train first aiders from amongst the staff


Generation of human waste
 


Public health impacts, impact on wildlife
 


Provide a suitable toilet for staff
 


Spillage of wastes on transit


Land pollution, aesthetic impacts, public health concerns


Ensure the transit lorry is well covered
Obtain a waste transportation licence from NEMA and adhere to all conditions of license
The transporting should never be overloaded
Hire competent drivers


Use of water
 


Increased demand
for water
 


Water saving initiatives
Rainwater harvesting 
Water reuse


Accumulation of wastes


Negative aesthetic impacts


Ensure prompt removal of wastes an delivery to recycling centers 


Generation of exhaust emissions  from transport


Air pollution


Ensure vehicles are well maintained
Ensure no open burning of wastes

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Narok County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
KODIA D. BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/8448528         National Environment Management Authority.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  44
MWARA AUCTIONEERS
Disposal of Uncollected Goods
NOTICE is issued pursuant to the provisions of the Disposal of Uncollected Goods Act (Cap. 38) of the laws of Kenya, to Messrs. Kiriiyu Merchants to collect motor vehicle reg. No. KBR 407P, Prime mover, within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice upon payment of all the outstanding storage charges plus any other costs incurred, failure to which the said motor vehicles will be sold by public auction or private treaty without any further notice.
ESTHER G. GICIMU,
MR/8448559                                             for Mwara Auctioneers.

