
				Page: 1132Gazette Notice No. 3267
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL VALUES AND PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT IN MIGORI COUNTY
1.0 INTRODUCTION
THE Migori County Public Service Board (MCPSB) was established on 25th July, 2013 under section 59 of County Government Act, 2012.  It is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a seal.  It is capable of suing and being sued in its corporate name.
2.0     BOARD MEMBERS 

Name


Designation


Peterlis Nyatuga


Chairman


Robi Mabanga


Vice-Chairperson


Michael Okumu


Member


Martine Dima


Member


Jabes Bunde


Member


Mercy Sau


Member

3.0 VISION OF MCPSB
To be a leading County Public Service Board  which is a bench mark for a high performing, dynamic and ethical County Public Service in Kenya.
4.0 MISSION OF MCPSB
To make Migori County Public Service to be vibrant, efficient, effective, Professional and ethical.
5.0 FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF MCPSB
The functions of Migori County Public Service Board are:
To establish and abolish offices in the Migori County Public Service.
To appoint persons to hold or act in offices of the Migori County Public Service including in the Boards of cities and urban areas within the county and to confirm appointments.
To exercise disciplinary control over and remove persons holding or acting in those offices as provided for under this part.
To prepare regular reports for submission to the County Assembly on the execution of the functions of the board.
To promote in the Migori County Public Service the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232.
To evaluate and report to the Migori County Assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with the Migori County Public Service.
To facilitate the development of coherent, integrated human resource planning and budgeting for personnel emoluments in the county.
To advise the Migori County Government on human resource management and development.
To advise Migori County Government on implementation and monitoring of the national performance management system in county.
10. To make recommendations to the salaries and Remuneration Commission, on behalf of the Migori County Government, on the remuneration, pensions and gratuities for Migori County Public Service employees.
6.0     COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD
The committees of the board are given in the table below:

Committee


Functions


 
Establishment, Recruitment, and Selection
 


(i)   Analyze reports and proposals and establishment of abolition of offices
(ii) Process requests for advertisements of vacancies
(iii) Scrutinize the indents to be advertised
(iv) Preparing interview tools and co-ordinate interviews
(v) Analyze and make recommendations on requests on appointments and promotions


 
Training and Development


(i)   Capacity building and training
(ii) Career management and development for the County Public Service employees
(iii) Co-ordinate seminars workshops and board trips


 
Administration, Finance and Advisory Committee


(i)   Administration and planning
(ii) Finance accounts, budgeting, procurement and expenditure
(iii) Information technology
(iv) Board records/library services
(v) Advise and give recommendations to salaries and remuneration Commission (SRC) on behalf of the County on the remuneration, pensions and gratuity for the County Public Service employees


 
Ethics and HR Audit
 


(i)   Spearhead performance contracting and appraisals
(ii) Development of human resource policies, HR management
(iii) Discipline and promotions
(iv) Litigations and legal services

7.0   ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE BOARD DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015
During the Financial Year 2014/2015 year under review the board has achieved the following—
(a) Recruitment
The board has recruited the employees in the table below competitively as at 31st December, 2014

Designation


Number


County Secretary


1


Chief Officers


12


Directors


14


Sub-County Administrators


8


Ward Administrators


40


Director Human Resource


1


Director Procurement


1


Fundraising Manager


1


Personal Secretary


2


Drivers


46


Members of County Policing Authority


8


Legal Advisor


1


Payroll Manager


1


Managing Director MIKUTRA


1


Director ICT


1


Physical Planners


3


Accountants


11


Accounts Clerk


2


Clerical Officers


59


Office Messengers


30


Market Attendants


117


Total


360

(b) Distribution of Employees appointed by MCPSB by Gender

Gender


Number


Percentage


Male


244


67.8%


Female


116


32.2%


Total


360


100%

(c)  Overall Distribution of Employees Appointed by the Board by Ethnic Group

 

Ethnic Group


Number


Percentage


Luos


228


63


Others (Kuria, Suba, Luhya, Nubians, Somalis, Kikuyu, Meru ) etc


132


37


Total


 360


100%

(a) Overall Distribution of People with Living Disability Appointed by the Board 

Condition 


Number


Percentage


People With Disability (PWDs)


8


3%


Physically fit


352


97%


Total


360


100%


Migori County Public Service Board employed all people with disability (PWDs) who applied and qualified for appointment. The deficit of 2 per cent will be filled during the subsequent recruitment.
(a) Development of Strategic Plan 2014–2018
The board has developed its Strategic Plan for the Financial Year 2014-2018.
(b) Development of Human Resource Policy
The board has developed HR policy that is intended to give direction to the county on Human Resource Management. The policy will be presented to Migori County Assembly for approval before implementation.
(c)  Development of Migori County Public Service Board Bill, 2014
The board has developed Migoiri County Public Service Board Bill, 2014 that will give the board legal status. So the bill was presented to the Kenya Law reform Commission for review and has been submitted to Migori County Assembly for approval
(d) Staff Establishment
The staff establishment was developed during training workshop at Tom Mboya Labour College, Kisumu for CEC members, chief officers, directors and sub-county administrators, the objective of which was for the County to come up with approved staff establishment to enable the county to have efficient utilization of human resource. Staff establishment for Migori County is in place.
(e)  Conduct of Suitability Interviews
The board conducted suitability interview for employees of former Local Authorities and established that some employees cannot be absorbed by Migori County Government because they do not have the required qualifications. On the basis of the results of suitability interview the board recommended that casuals who are qualified should be absorbed.
8.0   PROMOTION OF VALUES AND PRINCIPLES
The board found no impediment in meeting the threshold spelt out in section (65) (10) e of the County Government Act which states:
(1) In selecting candidates for appointment, the County Public Service Board shall consider—
(a) the standard values and principles set out in Art. 10, 27(4), 56 (c) and 232 (1) of the Constitution;
(e) the need to ensure that at least 30 per cent of the vacant posts at entry level are filled by candidates who are not from dominant ethnic community in the county.
 Inclusion and integration of minorities and marginalized groups.
• A county government, public and private organization and private individual, shall observe the following principles—
(a) protection of marginalized and minority groups from discrimination and from treatment of distinction of any kind, including language, religion, culture, national or social origin, sex, caste, birth, descentor  status;
(b) Non-discrimination and equality of treatment in all areas of economic, educational, social, religious, political and cultural life of the marginalized and minority groups;
In meeting this requirement the board achieved 30 per cent as it employed people from Taita Taveta, Kisii, Kamba, Meru, Kalanjin and Luhyias.
9.0           PROGRAMMES THE BOARD HAS UNDERTAKEN OR HAS PLANNED TO UNDERTAKE TOWARDS PROMOTION OF THE NATIONAL VALUES AND PRINCIPLES
(a) The board in seeking to meet 5 per cent threshold of people living with disabilities being in included in the workforce as stipulated in Persons living with disability Act  and inclusivity as required in the constitution  of Kenya the board seeks to create and fill a substantive positions to be held by a person living with disability to enhance mainstreaming of PWDs within the County Public Service.
(b) In addition the board continues to engage with people living with disability through their umbrella organization together with engaging with members of the County Assembly representing this segment of our populace to find ways and means of assimilating people living with disability into our workforce. In this regard the board has achieved the 5 per cent requirement for PWDs.
(c) The board attended training workshop on Values and Principles of Governance organized by National Cohesion and Integration Commission (NCIC) held at Tom Mboya Labour College, Kisumu (24–27th November, 2014), where the board prepared questionnaire and visited County departments to establish the extent to which values and principles of public service have been complied with within the county.
(d) Inclusion and integration of minorities and marginalized groups A county government, public and private organization and private individual, shall observe the following principles—
(i)   protection of marginalized and minority groups from discrimination and from treatment of distinction of any kind, including language, religion, culture, national or social origin, sex, caste, birth, descentor  status;
(ii) Non-discrimination and equality of treatment in all areas of economic, educational, social, religious, political and cultural life of the marginalized and minority groups;  under this requirement the board employed members of the minority and marginalized groups within the county.
This includes members of the Kuria, Luhyia and Suba and Kisii sub tribes.
1.0        DEVELOPMENT OF POLICIES
The board also intends to complete policy documents that govern the County Public Service in order to bring about uniformity in dealing with public servants. Some of the policies the board intends to undertake:

Policy


Status


HR  Policy:
developed to ensure to take annual leave within the set timelines so that they can recuperate and to avoid accumulation of leave.


In draft form


HR training


In Draft form


Service charter


In progress


Promotion policy


In progress


Retirement policy


In Progress


Performance Contracting


In progress


Development of organograms for all departments


completed


Strategic plan


Completed


Internship policy


In progress


Staff establishment


Completed


Suitability interviews


Completed


Promotion of Values and Principles


Continuous


Preparation of Public Service Board Bill


Completed

11.           CHALLENGES
Court Cases
During the year under review the board had been seized with civil suits,
(a) –13 --vs Migori County Government, PSB
A contempt of court was filled by the minority groups who felt the board had not taken care of their interest in employment, but this case was dismissed.
(b) A case filed against county Government of Migori for stopping salary payment of 17 workers of former Local Authority who were irregularly engaged.
(c)  Case filed against county Government of Migori for summarily dismissal of a CEC for gross misconduct.
(d) KNUT-vs- The Hon. Attorney-General and two others
The board advertised 660 ECDE positions to be filled. However the High Court stopped the exercise country wide. This is a critical area and we are looking forward to this ban being lifted to enable the hiring of these teachers to help our children Petition filed seeking to stop recruitment of ECDE teachers by County Governments.
In all these instances the county had legal representation defending the matters.
Financial Challenge
Funds located to the board is not sufficient
Human Resource Challenge
Insufficient employees.
Physical Resource Challenges
Lack of sufficient office space.
Lack of sufficient utility vehicles.
Dated the 4th May, 2015.
PETERLIS NYATUGA,
Chairman,
MR/7407494                        Migori County Public Service Board.
 
 

