
				Page: 1104Gazette Notice No. 3136
THE KENYA INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS ACT
 (Cap. 411A)
TASKFORCE TO REVIEW THE KENYA INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS ACT (BROADCASTING REGULATIONS, 2010)
Appointment
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Information Communication and Technology has appointed a Taskforce to review Kenya Information and Communications Act (Broadcasting Regulations, 2010).
The Taskforce shall comprise of the following members—
Albert Kamunde—(Chairperson)
Members:
Linus Kakai.
Sekou Owino.
Stephen Mutoro.
Marisella Ouma (Dr.)
David Warui Mugenyo.
Wilfred Nyamu Mati.
Mustafa Ali (Dr.).
Akunga Momanyi (Dr.).
Daniel Obam.
Mercy Wanjau (Ms.).
Robin Busolo—(Secretary).
2.  The terms of reference of the taskforce are—
(a) to align the  Kenya Communication Information Act (Broadcasting Regulations, 2010) with the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 and the Kenya Information and Communications (Amendment) 1998 (As amended);
(b) to identify and propose the need, if any, for amendments, changes and /or improvements to the Broadcasting Regulations, definitions and substantive provisions so as to accurately reflect contemporary realities and factors such as new technologies and to propose specific amendments to existing  Rules and Regulations;
(c) to draft the text for new Regulations in light of new conditions and emerging trends;
(d) to hold consultative meetings with stakeholders and members of the Public to collect and collate their views and proposals on the draft documents in light of the foregoing;
(e) to conduct any background research necessary to achieve its objectives;
(f)  to conduct any other background research and provide advisory information to the Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology.
3.  The Taskforce shall have the powers necessary to undertake any matter incidental or ancillary to the matters stated herein.
4.  The Taskforce may co-opt such other persons, who possess the appropriate competencies as are necessary for the performance of the terms of reference.
5.  The Taskforce shall —
(a) prepare a detailed work plan;
(b) prepare any documents related to the terms of reference; and
(c) hold consultative meetings with the Cabinet Secretary, sector stakeholders and members of public.
6.  The Taskforce shall regulate its own procedures.
7.  The Secretariat of the Taskforce shall be based at the offices of the Communications Authority of Kenya, Waiyaki Way, P.O. Box 14448–00800, Nairobi.
8.  The Taskforce shall submit the final report to the Cabinet Secretary within two months from 6th May, 2015.
9.  The term of the office of the Taskforce shall be for a period of two (2) months with effect from 6th May, 2015, and the Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communications and Technology may when necessary, extend the period.
Dated the 16th April, 2015.
FRED MATIANG’I,
Cabinet Secretary,
Information Communication and Technology.

