
				Page: 1139Gazette Notice No. 3272
THE KENYA WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT ACT, 2013
THE KENYA WILDLIFE SERVICE (KWS)
THE KENYA NATIONAL HIGWAY AUTHORITY (KENHA)
PUBLIC NOTICE
PURSUANT to Section 38 of the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act, 2013 and in consultation with the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS), the Kenya National Highway Authority (KeNHA) is seeking to utilize part of Nairobi National Park (NNP) for the construction of the Nairobi Southern By-pass Road.
The total protected area/wildlife habitat affected by the by-pass Road is 89 acres, along a distance of 4 km. stretching from Ole Sereni Hotel to Carnivore Restaurant. The shortest and longest distances that the By-pass Road dips into Nairobi National Park from the park boundary are 60 and 248 meters respectively. KeNHA in consultation with KWS has identified a parcel of land adjacent to NNP on the Ole Kasasi Adjudication Section along the Mbagathi Valley for purchase, acquisition and subsequent annexing to NNP in exchange of the land to be utilized by the By-pass Road.
KeNHA has proposed to purchase and acquire the parcel of land and exchange the same with the section of Nairobi National Park Land that will be utilized for the By-pass Road, under the principle of “enhancing efficient wildlife conservation" to mitigate the impact of wildlife habitat loss to be caused by the By-pass road. The expected variation of Nairobi National Park boundary shall be to increase the park area by annexing the additional parcel of land for conservation as envisaged under section 38 of the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act, 2013. KeNHA has conducted the required Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) in accordance with the provisions of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination Act (EMCA, 1999). The EIAs have shown that the proposed National Park land exchange shall greatly and positively enhance wildlife conservation in Nairobi National Park.
Pursuant to the Fourth Schedule of the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act, 2013, the General Public is hereby notified to inspect the details of this proposal at KeNHA Head office and KWS Headquarters, and provide written submission to the Director-General, KeNHA, Blue Shield Towers, P. O. Box 49712-00100, Nairobi, and Director-General, KWS on or before 30th June, 2015. A one-dayPublic Consultation meeting/workshop has been organized on3rd July, 2015 at the KWS Head office commencing 0900 hrs. during which oral presentations shall be submitted.
L. K.TONUI,
MR/7407390                                               Ag. Director-General.

