
				Page: 1134Gazette Notice No. 3268
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF KISUMU
KISUMU COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
Annual Report for the Year 2014 to the County Assembly of Kisumu, December, 2014
Executive Summary
In line with the County Governments Act No. 17 of 2012, the County Public Service Board is required to prepare and present to the County Assembly an Annual Report of all its activities for each Calendar year. Pursuant to the aforesaid, the Board in compliance with the Act has completed its report for the year 2014. 
During the year under review, the County Public Service Board established five committees to assist it deliver on its mandate, Recruited Chief Officers (except for Chief Officer Treasury whose recruitment was halted by a Court order),hired Heads of Departments (save for the County Payroll Manager who was yet to take up the appointment) to take up the positions of the Interim Officers who were seconded by Transition Authority, appointed Sub County and Ward Administrators, and conducted interviews for ECDE Assistants, Health Services Staff whose appointments are to be finalized by end of February,2015.
In the year 2015, the board has planned a number of activities such as the finalization of the Strategic Plan, Discipline Manual and Board Charter; conducting interviews for Tourism Officers, Board’s, City Manager and  the Board’s Secretariat; selections of ECDE Assistants and Health Services Staff; induction of new employees, evaluating the impact of training and development activities on service delivery, capacity Building for Board members; servicing indents as and when received from the executive. Putting in place the Board’s website and embracing Information and Communication Technology in all its activities; Promotion of Values and Principles good governance; Human Resource Staff Audit and Rationalization programme. Change management activities especially organizational behaviour.
Despite the various challenges faced during the year under review, the Board realized its objectives. The Board still remains committed to discharging its mandate and fulfilling its obligations as stipulated in the County Governments Act
REPORT OF THE KISUMU COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD TO THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST DECEMBER, 2014.
INTRODUCTION
Pursuant to the County Governments Act No.17 of 2012 Section59 (1) (d), (e), (3), (5), and (6), the County Public Service Board is required to report to the County Assembly every December of each year on its activities.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
The County Public Service Board of Kisumu was established in line with The County Governments Act, section 57. The section states that:
 There is established a County Public Service Board in each County, which shall be—
(a)   a body corporate with perpetual succession and a seal; and
(b)   capable of suing and being sued in its corporate name.
The County Public Service Board of Kisumu County came into being on 27th November, 2013 through Kenya Gazette Notice Number 14935 of the same date (27.11.2013) and thereafter, the Board members were sworn in on 28th November, 2013.
FUNCTIONS AND POWER OF THE COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
Section 59 of The County Governments Act provides the functions and powers of a County Public Service Board and these are:-
Establish and abolish offices in the County Public Service;
Appoint persons to hold or act in offices of the County Public Service including in the Boards;
Exercise disciplinary control over, and remove , persons holding , or acting in those offices as provided for under this part;
Prepare regular reports for submission to the County Assembly on the execution of the functions of the Board;
Promote in the County Public Service the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232;
Evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service;
Facilitate the development of coherent, integrated human resource planning and budgeting for personnel emoluments in counties;
Advise the County Government on human resource management and development;
Advise County Government on implementation and monitoring of the national performance management system in counties;
Make recommendations to the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, on behalf of the County Government, on the remuneration, pensions and gratuities for County Public Service employees.
COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD
Section 58 of The County Governments Act provides for the composition of the County Public Service Board.  Section 58 provides (among others) that:
(1) The County Public Service Board shall comprise—
(a)  a chairperson nominated and appointed by the County Governor with the approval of the County Assembly;
(b)  not less than three but not more than five other members nominated and appointed by the County Governor, with the approval of the County Assembly; and
(c)  a certified public secretary of good professional standing nominated and appointed by the Governor, with the approval of the County Assembly, who shall be the Secretary to the Board.
The County Public Service Board is currently composed of seven members as listed below:
Betty A. O. Asunah -Vice Chairperson Hesbon Owuor Hongo - (Secretary).
Moses Odingo – Member
Jackson Odeny Oyoo – Member
Emily Atieno Olago – Member
Violet Sally Onyango - Member
BOARD COMMITTEES
The Board established five (5) committees to assist the Board deliver on its mandate, with each committee consisting of at least four Board members. The Board will from time to time co-opt other members in attendance depending on the issue under deliberation.
The Committees are-

Committee


Chairperson


Secretary


Members


Roles


Human Resource Audit and Performance Management


Jackson Odeny Oyoo


CS Hesbon Hongo


Violet Sally Onyango
Emily Olago


Setting policies and guidelines for  staff Audit and reviewing compliance with the same; Ensuring that performance management systems are put in place


Agenda


CS Betty Asunah


CS Hesbon Hongo


Eng. Nashon Oguya
Jackson Oyoo Odeny


Scrutinizing and processing of requests from various departments and presenting the same to the Board for decision; Preparing Agenda for Board meetings and Processing decisions made and ensuring timely communication to concerned parties/ departments


Discipline, Governance and Ethics


Moses  Ondiek
Odingo


CS Hesbon Hongo


CS Betty Asunah
Violet Sally Onyango


Processing of discipline cases for consideration by the Board; Preparation of disciplinary Board reports;
Administration of the County Public Service Code of Conduct;
Responsible for Ethics and Integrity in the County Public Service ;Developing and Coordinating implementation of proactive measures including campaigns and outreach for the County Public Service on good Governance, Ethics and Integrity


Finance, Procurement and ICT


Violet Sally Onyango


CS Hesbon Hongo


Emily Olago
Jackson Odeny Oyoo


Review of draft budget for the Board Budget; Reviewing quarterly financial Reports; Approval of the annual procurement plan for the Board and ICT governance


Recruitment ,Selection and Training,


Emily Olago


CS Hesbon Hongo


Moses Ondiek Odingo
Eng. Nashon Oguya


Approving indents and adverts for positions to be filled; Recommending suitable candidates for selection and setting training policies and guidelines

OBJECTIVES OF THE REPORT
The main objectives of the report are to ensure that the Board:
Complies with the relevant provisions of The County Governments Act, 2012,as pertains to the preparation and submission of the annual report to the County Assembly
Reports its activities in a transparent manner to enhance transparency and accountability.
SCOPE OF THE REPORT
This report covers the period from1st January 2014 to 31st December 2014.
WORK DONE
8.1 RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION
During the period under review, the Board advertised, shortlisted, interviewed and concluded the hiring of the following personnel:-
Chief Officers except Chief Officer Treasury (a Court order halted the process), but will be cleared in the forthcoming year 2015.
County Heads of Departments save for the County Payroll Manager who  was yet to take up the appointment
Sub- County Administrators
Ward Administrators
In addition to the above, the Board recommended for appointment candidates for the following positions:-
County Secretary
County Attorney & Chief Legal Officer
As at the end of December, 2015, a total of sixty positions have been filled through the recruitment and selection process – Chief Officers (12). Sub-county Administrators – 7;  Ward Administrators – 35; Heads of Departments/ Directors – 6.
Work in progress:-
The Board also advertised and interviewed candidates for the following positions
ECD assistants: Out of the 1986 interviewed , 700 were to be hired in line with the Budget that was set aside for that purpose.
Health services staff in the following fields:-
-Pharmacists
-Registered Nurses
-Clinical Officers - General
-Clinical Officers – Anesthetists
-Medical Laboratory Technologists
-Pharmaceutical Technologists
-Medical Engineers – Technologists
-Radiographers
-Occupational Therapists
-Enrolled Community Health Nurses
-Public Health Officers
The actual number to be hired in the case of the ECDE Assistants and Health services were to be determined by the availability of funds.
The Board further advertised and shortlisted candidates for the following positions who were scheduled to be interviewed on various dates in January 2015:-
City Manager
Tourism Research and Development Officer
Tourism Standards Officer
Tourism Marketing Officer
Board Secretariat Staff
-Human Resource and Administration Officer
-ICT Officer
-Records Management Officer
-Finance Officer/ Accountant
-Office Secretary
-ICT Assistant
-Human Resource / Records Clerk
 Re-advertised positions for Board Secretariat included:-
-Director/Human Resource Management and Administration
-Public Relations Officer
8.2 INDUCTION
The Board conducted induction for the newly appointed Chief Officers and all Departmental Heads. Sub – County and Ward Administrators induction was partially done and will be completed next year 2015.
8.3 SEMINARS, WORKSHOPS, CONFERENCES
The Board has participated in various seminars, workshops and conferences and capacity building aimed at effective and efficient service delivery, among them:-
Workshop on Performance Management Contracting organized by UNDP at Mbita.
Seminar on Delegated powers by Public Service Board to the Human Resource Advisory Committee
Familiarization with the operations of the Public Service Commission and Ministry of Devolution and Planning
Benchmarking with Nairobi County Public Service Board.
Annual Consultative Forum for all County Public Service Boards in Kenya.
Annual International Conference for Certified Public Secretaries.
Consultative meeting with Leadership of County Governments on Human Resource Functions
8.4 SUITABILITY INTERVIEWS
Upon the request of the office of the Governor, the Board conducted suitability interviews for the following staff who had been engaged by the County Government prior to the constitution of the Board:-
Director of Administration
Chief of Staff
Director of Resource Mobilization & Delivery Unit
Director of Special Programmes / Project Delivery Unit
Director of Protocol
Director of Research , Policy and Strategy / Cabinet Office
Director of Research & Policy / PA to Governor
Chief Protocol Officer
Protocol Officer
Political Advisor
Senior Personal Secretary to Governor
Personal Assistant to Deputy Governor
Information Officers(2) -Journalists
Security Officer, Office of the Governor
Chief Receptionist
Messenger / Deputy Governor’s office
Personal Secretary to Deputy Governor
Driver to the Office of the Governor
Driver to the Office of the Deputy Governor
Housekeeper/ Cook, Deputy Governor
Gardener, Deputy Governor’s Residence
Chief Chef/ Governor’s Residence
The Board did not however carry out suitability interviews for the following positions:-
Director, Energy and Natural Resources-The holder of this officer had already been appointed Chief Officer, Green Energy and Climate Change.
Chief Officer, Public Relations, Marketing and Change Management(who did not turn up citing her pending case against the County Government).
The Board, through its Secretary, participated in the recruitment and selection of the County Land Management Board and the names of the successful candidates were forwarded to the His Excellency the Governor for appointment after vetting by the County Assembly. 
8.5 DISCIPLINE, ETHICS AND GOVERNANCE
During the period under Review the following cases were forwarded to the Board:-
 45 employees who had been dismissed by the Public Service Commission on fraud related cases and who had been given the right of Review. The Board advised them to apply to the Public Service Commission for review.
36 staff of the former Municipal Council of Kisumu who were ordered to be reinstated by the Court in its Judgment of 2012. The Board has given direction over the matter.
12 workers who had been suspended/interdicted by the former Municipal Council of Kisumu over alleged misappropriation of funds and other indiscipline cases. The Board referred the cases back to the Human Resource Advisory Committee for further investigations and a detailed report to enable the Board give guidance.
The Board was served with summons in respect of the following cases:-
32 sacked casual staff whose case is pending before the Kisumu Industrial Court. The Board was ordered not to fill their positions pending hearing and determination of the case
The case of Merita Ombuor, who has sued the County Government for alleged wrongful dismissal and whose case is also pending before the Kisumu Industrial Court. She is back to work on orders of the Court awaiting determination of case.
The case challenging the Board’s decision to re-advertise the position of the Chief Officer, Treasury following interviews that had been conducted. The Court has ordered the County Government to either appoint one of the candidates to fill the position or inform the affected candidates why they did not qualify.
The Board, in consultation with the office of the Governor and the National Anti-Corruption Commission advertised for recruitment of representatives from the various sub- counties to sit in the County Anti- Corruption Oversight Committee.
The Board has also developed the Board Charter and Discipline Manual which are awaiting public participation and launch.
The Board has further developed a mandate in which it seeks to delegate some of its powers to the Human Resource Advisory Committee made up of the County Secretary (Chairperson), County Head of Human Resource (Secretary),
. Composition of the Human Resource Advisory Committee :will be composed of the following members—
County Secretary                                     - Chairman
Head of Human Resource Management   - Secretary
Chief Officer/ Finance
Chief Officer / Health
Chief Officer / Agriculture
Chief /Officer /Education ,Gender, Youth, Culture and Social Services
Chief Officer /Transport & Infrastructure
Chief Officer /Administration
City Manager –Kisumu
8.6 HUMAN RESOURCE, AUDIT AND PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT
The Board, in collaboration with Kisumu Urban Project has come up with the Human Resource policy manual. The Board obtained inputs of various stake holders (public participation) and the document has been forwarded to the County Executive Committee for information and operationalization.
The Board embarked on an initial  staff Audit and established the existing staff levels. In addition the Capacity Assessment and Rationalization Programme (CARPS) which is a joint activity between the County Governments and the National Government is working towards establishing staff competency levels which will lead to staff rationalization. Phase 1 of the Programme (Biometric registration of staff) has been conducted , Phase 2 – the staff rationalization will be finalized in 2015/2016.
8.7 FINANCE, PROCUREMENT AND ICT
The Board developed its Budget for 2014/2015 in accordance to its programmes and sub-programmes and have been included under the Governor’s Vote Book for this initial stage .
The Board has initiated the process of formulating a five year strategic plan (2015-2019) and has engaged the services of an expert to guide the exercise, which is expected to be completed by the end of January 2015.
VALUES AND PRINCIPLES OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE
The Board at the outset carried out a sensitization of the staff on the values and principles of the public service (Article 232) at the worksites shown below with regard to what kind of quality is required in service delivery by public service staff  : efficiency, promptness, economical :
Nyakach , Muhoroni, Ksm East & Kisumu West and Headquarters.
In addition, in the recruitment and selection of new staff during the period under reporting, the Board seriously considered the selections to ensure the balance of gender and persons with disability as follows:-

Item No


Position 
 


Total Hired


No of Males (M)


No. of Females (F)


Special Considerations for Youth  & Pwd


No of Youth


No of Persons with Disability (PWD)


1.


Chief Officers


12


7


5


1 (F)


-


2.


Sub-County Administrator


7


6


1


-


1 (M)


3.


Ward Administrators


35


31


4


17


2 (M)


4.


Heads Of Departments /Directors


6


4


2


2


-


 


Total


60


48
(80% of total)


12 
(20% of total)


20  
( 33% of total)


3 (M)  
(5% of total)


 
PROGRAMME OF ACTIVITIES FOR 2015
The Board has lined up a number of activities to be carried out in the year 2015. Key among them being:
Strategic activities
-Development of annual work plan for the Board
-Developing and Implementing the Board’s Annual Procurement plan.
-Finalization and launching of the Board’s Strategic Plan.
-Operationalization of the Human Resource Policy manual.
- Identification and Movement into new office premises for the Board.
Promotion of values and principles of Governance and Public Service as envisaged in Articles 10 and 232 of the Constitution of Kenya
-Quarterly outreach to each of the seven sub-counties for sentisization
-Conduct anti-corruption workshops for County Executive for First quarter followed by a roll-out to Chief Officers, Directors and lower cadres
- Setting up of Departmental Anti-corruption Committees
-Working with the National Anti-Corruption Oversight Committee to constitute the Kisumu County Anti-Corruption Oversight Committee
Recruitment and selection of other cadres of staff for the County Government of Kisumu among them:-
ü City Manager
ü Board Secretariat
ü Staff of the Department of Commerce, Tourism and Heritage
(For the advertised positions)
ü Members of the Anti-Corruption Committee
ü Secretariat for Directorate of Alcoholic drinks.
ü All other Directors for the various Departments apart from the ones already recruited as stated above
ü Village Administrators
ü Members of Boards and Managers of  towns and Municipalities
Performance & Staff Rewards
-Sensitization of county staff/citizens on the Board’s Mandate and Service delivery issues.
-Administration of Performance Management of staff
-Advising SRC on harmonization of salary structures.
Human Resource Management
-Organizing training and capacity building for the County Public Service Board.
-Human Resource and staff Rationalization programme.
-Induction of new staff.
-Review of all pending discipline cases.
-Carrying out research in training needs.
-Pending cases of promotions, transfers, discipline, re-designations, retirements, career progression and talent management.
-Advising the Governor on various Human Resource issues.
-Follow up on the establishment of the village units and the various Boards within the County that were yet to be set up.
CHALLENGES
Lack of Secretariat staff-Technical and Operations staff. This has slowed down the pace at which the Board operates e.g. long-listing and short-listing of job applicants, development of operational procedures, control and processing of vouchers
Inadequate office accommodation. The Board is still housed at the City Hall (former Mayor’s Parlor). The current accommodation is grossly inadequate for the Board members. Adequate office accommodation is urgently required to also house the yet to be established Secretariat. Efforts to identify adequate office space have so far been unsuccessful.
Lack of official vehicles. This has been a challenge. However, arrangements to allocate vehicles for the year 2015 to the Board are ongoing.
11. CONCLUSION
The Board will strive to achieve its mandate efficiently and effectively to ensure service delivery through highly motivated staff to ensure that the County achieves its vision- a harbor of excellence.
NASHON W.O. OGUYA,
Chairman
HESBON OWUOR HONGO,
Secretary
MR/7407406                        for fhe Kisumu Public Service Board.


