
				Page: 1108Gazette Notice No. 3149
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NYERI
Appointment of the Dairy Task Force
PURSUANT to the powers conferred to the Governor and in execution to the functions of the Executive Committee under the County Government Act, 2012. It is notified for public information that, the Ag. Executive Secretary Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, Nyeri County, have appointed a Dairy TaskForce to formulate one agenda for the development of the dairy sector in order to enhance efficiency and commercial viability. The Dairy Task Force consists of the following:
Muchiri G. Wanjohi—(Chairman).
Members:
Ephantus Gichohi.
Sammy J. Gichobi.
Delphin W. Kameru.
Watson Theuri.
Charles Mwaniki.
David Kingori Njogu.
Lydia N. Kagema.
Josphat N. Gitahi.
Naftali Thiru Makumi.
Geoffrey K. Kang’ang’i.
Joyce Muthoni.
Gichohi Kariuki.
Joseph Kamau Ndiritu.
Hon. Muhika Mutahi.
Beatrice Mugendi (Dr.).
Samuel N. Mutua.
Charles Gitonga.
W. C. M. Theuri.
Muthee  Ikiara.
Francis Njiri.
Stephen Gitonga.
Ruth W. Mwangi.
David Wangai Gitonga.
John Kangara.
David Kimongo.
Peter Karubi.
Luke K. Kiragu.
Douglas Kiura Munge (Dr.).
The Terms of Reference are as follows:
(i)       To assess and recommend ways of improving quality and quantity of dairy and dairy products in the county.
(ii)     To assess setbacks in availability and accessibility of dairy credits.
(iii)    To assess the availability and quality of feeds and other dairy inputs and recommend ways of addressing them.
(iv)    To identify dairy infrastructural challenges that which if improved could lead to minimized milk losses.
(v)     To identify ways and means of empowering dairy stakeholders capacity through training, research and development in dairy industry.
(vi)    To endeavored and develop a comprehensive, practical and inclusive strategy in extension methodology such as Farmers Field Schools to enhance dairy production.
(vii)  To identify and recommend ways of streamlining local and export marketing channels for dairy and dairy products.
(viii) To consider, devise and recommend a programme of activities to launch and fast track milk value addition in the county.
(ix)    To identify and familiarize with regulations and standardizations in the county and globally for dairy production, marketing, processing and packaging to make it more competitive, profitable and rewarding to dairy farmers and other actors in the value chain.
(x)     To enhance adoption of modern farming technologies and integration of Information Communication Technologies (ICT) and in dairy sector.
(xi)    To lobby and recommend the appropriate and relevant legislation for promotion and commercialization of the dairy sector in the county.
(xii)  To assess ways of addressing the safe use and proper disposal of livestock drugs through collaboration with relevant stakeholders.
(xiii) To devise ways of integrating the youth in dairy value chain.
(xiv) To assess the sustainability and fast tract operationalization of dips.
(xv)  To assess ways and means of bringing affordable A.I. services closer to the farmer.
(xvi) To devise ways of creating a contingency fund in Veterinary directorate to carter for emergency cases.
(xvii)   To identify and lobby for investors and promote partnerships in the dairy sector.
CHARLES GITHUA GITHINJI,
Ag. Executive Secretary,
MR/7407483           Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, Nyeri County.

