
				Page: 1140Gazette Notice No. 3011
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MOUNT KIPIPIRI GOLF RESORT CONSTRUCTION PROJECT ON PLOT NO. L.R. 3777/416/4 IN KIPIPIRI, NYANDARUA COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Mount Kipipiri Golf Resort)is proposing to construct a resort on Plot L. R. No. 3777/416/4, in Kipipiri, Nyandarua County
The proposed development will comprise of an eighteen (18) hole golf course, a club house, a five star Hotel and a Conference centre, and holiday houses, a theme park, a ridding park and a botanical garden on circum 1400 acres parcel of land.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental and Social impacts


Mitigation measure


Demand of raw material


Source building materials from local supplierswho use environmentally friendly processes in their operations.
Ensure accurate budgeting and estimation of actual construction material requirements to ensure that the least amount of material necessary is ordered.
Ensure that damage or loss of materials at the construction site is kept minimal through proper storage.
Use at lease 5% to 10% recycled refurbished or salvaged materials to reduce the use of raw materials and divert material from landfills.


Vegetation disturbance


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area to be affected by construction works.
Specify locations for trailers and equipment, and areas of the site which should be kept free of traffic, equipment and storage.
Designate access routes and parking within the site.
Introduction of vegetation (trees, shrubs and grass) on open spaces and around the project site and their maintenance.
Design and implement an appropriate landscaping program to help in re-vegetate of part of the project area after construction.


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


Surface runoff and roof water shall be harvested and stored in tanks so that it can be used for cleaning purposes.
A storm water management plan that minimizes impervious area infiltration by use of recharge areas and use of detention and/or retention with graduated outlet control structure will be designed.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to use existing graded roads.
Ensure that any compacted areas are ripped to reduce run-off.
Site excavation works to be planned such that a section is completed and rehabilitated before another section begins.
Interconnected open drains will be provided on site.
Roof catchments will be used to collect the storm water for some substation uses.
Construction of water storage tanks to collect storm water for substation uses.


Increased solid waste generation
 


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: Reduction at source, Recycling, Reusing, Incineration, Sanitary land filling.
Through accurate estimation of the dimensions and quantities of materials required.
Use of durable, long lasting material that will not need to be replaced as often, thereby reducing the amount of construction waste generated over time.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure to the elements.
Use building materials that have minimal or no packaging to avoid the generation of excessive packaging waste.
Reuse packaging materials such as cartons, cement bags, empty metal and plastic containers to reduce waste at site.
Dispose waster more responsibly by contracting a registered waste handler who will dispose the wastes at designated sites or landfills only.
Waste collection bins to be provided at designated points on site.


Dust emission
 


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal Protective equipment to be provided to employees and worn.


Exhaust emission
 


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasibly equipment shall be properly maintained.
Sensitize truck drivers to avoid unnecessary running engines of stationary vehicles and to switch off engines whenever possible.


Noise and vibration
 


Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being use.
Sensitize construction drivers to avoid running of vehicle engines or hooting.
Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation.
Ensure that all generators and heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures (containers) to minimize ambient noise levels.
Trees to be planted around the site to provide some buffer against noise propagation.
The noisy construction works will entirely be planned to be during the day time when most of the neighbours will be at work.


Increased energy consumption
 


Ensure electrical equipment, appliances and lights are switched off when not being use.
Install energy saving bulbs/tubes at all lighting points instead of incandescent bulbs which consume higher electric energy.


Increased water demand
 


Water to be brought in from the City Water and Sewerage Company. Harness rainwater for office and gardening.
Install water conserving taps that turn-off automatically when water is not being used.
Promote recycling and reuse of water as much as possible.
Install a discharge meter at water outlets to determine and monitor total water usage.
Promptly detect and repair of water pipe and tank leaks.
Sensitize construction workers to conserve water by avoiding unnecessary toilet flushing etc.
Ensure taps are not running when not in use.


Generation of waste water
 


Provide means for handling sewage generated at the construction site. Conduct regular checks for sewage pipe blockages or damages since such vices can lead to release of the effluent into the land and water bodies.
Monitor effluent quality regularly to ensure that the stipulated discharge rules and standards are not violated.


Statutory requirements


Ensure compliance with The OSHA (Building Operations and Works of Engineering Construction Rules), L.N. 40 of 1984.


Worksite safety and health hazards to employees
 


Ensure compliance with the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) 2007 provisions e.g. employees to be provided with appropriate PPE.


Oil spills hazards
 


Install oil trapping equipment in areas when there is a likelihood of oil spillage such as during the maintenance of construction facility. Soil in such an area will be well protected from contamination.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nyandarua County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7407184           National Environment Management Authority.

