
				Page: 1170GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3139
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE NATIONAL LAND COMMISSION ACT
(NO. 5 OF 2012)
TASKFORCE ON THE FORMULATION OF LEGISLATION ON INVESTIGATION AND ADJUDICATION OF COMPLAINS ARISING OUT OF HISTORICAL LAND INJUSTICES
Appointment
PURSUANT to section 15 of the National Land Commission Act, 2012 and Article 67 of the Constitution of Kenya, the National Land Commission appoints a Taskforce to formulate legislation on investigation and adjudication of complains arising out of historical land injustices.
Mandate
The mandate of the Taskforce is to formulate a bill to provide for investigation and adjudication of claims arising out of historical land injustices.
To achieve their mandate, the Taskforce will:
Undertake literature review on the concept of historical injustices with a view to developing a clear, practical, objective and universally acceptable definition of the concept as it applies to land in Kenya.
Identify the nature of claims arising out of historical land injustices.
Review comparative experiences of other countries in addressing historical injustices related to land and identify opportunities, challenges and best practices that can inform the Kenyan process.
Develop guidelines for the investigation of historical injustices to provide for national, communal and individual injustices.
Conduct stakeholder and expert consultations to receive input on the issues under review.
To develop a Draft Bill that meets provision of the Constitution, National Land Commission Act, 2012, Land Act, 2012 and Land Registration Act, 2012, applicable laws and Sessional Paper No. 3 (209) on the National Land Policy, to provide inter alia for:
(a) Definition of historical injustices;
(b) The process of identifying communities and individuals suffering from or affected by historical injustices;
(c)  Institutional mechanisms for resolving disputes over ownership of land affected by claims of historical injustices;
(d) Arbitrating claims to historical injustices;
(e)  Temporal limits to historical claims;
(f)   Remedies for historical grievances for both communities and individuals;
(g) Promotion of national cohesion and integration in the process of addressing historical injustices; and
(h) Promotion of reconciliation and healing in the process of dealing with historical grievances.
Powers
In the performance of its functions, the Taskforce shall have all powers necessary to:
(i)    Commission studies or research into reports and literature that may inform it on its mandate.
(ii)   Hold public hearings in Nairobi and at such other places as it shall deem necessary for the proper discharge of its mandate.
(iii)    Hold private hearings whenever it becomes necessary to instil confidence in the people appearing before the Task Force to allay their fears of adversity or reprisals.
(iv)    Receive written memoranda from individuals and groups on all issues relevant to its mandate.
(v)     Have access to all reports and documents necessary for the effective discharge of its mandate.
Reporting
The Taskforce shall report to the National Land Commission.
Mode of operation
In the performance of duties, the Taskforce shall:
(a) Regulate its procedure.
Quorum
The quorum of any meeting for purpose of conducting any business shall be 7 (seven) members.
Duration
(a) The Taskforce shall finalize its task within a period of nine months with effect from the date of gazettement.
(b) Any of the members may resign by writing to the Commission to that effect and such resignation shall take effect upon such letter of resignation being received by the Commission.
Costs
The cost incurred by the taskforce, including but not restricted to facilitation and the payment of allowance in respect of the members and the secretariat of the task force, shall be defrayed from funds of the National Land Commission.
Members
Samuel King’etich Tororei (Dr.)—(Chairman)
Rose Musyoka (Dr.)
Emma Njogu
Clement Lenachuru
Gichira Kibaara
Ken Nyaundi
Wilberforce Kisiero
Ms. Grace Mwailemi
Ms. Christine Kanini
Nickson O. Kakiri
Daniel Koilel Tinaayai
Amina A. Hashi
Augustine Masinde
Kasim Mwamzandi
Joint Secretaries:
Kaptuiya Cheboiwo
Fibian Lukalo (Dr.)
Dated the 20th February, 2014.
MUHAMMAD SWAZURI,
Chairman,
National Land Commission.

