
				Page: 2425GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7601
COMMISSION ON REVENUE ALLOCATION
Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers of the Commission on Revenue Allocation
Mission Statement
To make recommendations on equitable sharing of revenue, financing of and financial management for both national and county governments.
Vision
To be a trusted and effective adviser on equitable distribution of resources for rapid and balanced economic growth.
Values
The ethics of the Commission are founded on the core values of the Commission, normally spelt out in the acronym “Teetei”.
Teamwork                     -Encourages participation of all members
Equity                           -Guided by the spirit of fairness and inclusion
Excellence                     -Strive for the highest standards in all aspects of their work
Transparency                -All service delivery will include citizen’s participation
Employee Satisfaction   -Will strive to attract and retain staff with high morale
Integrity                        -Will abide and uphold integrity as per Chapter six of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010
1.0   INTRODUCTION
The Commission on Revenue Allocation (CRA) was established in December 2010 pursuant to Article 215 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. CRA envisions promoting sustainable and balanced economic development of the counties by way of prudential advise/recommendations of inter-governmental transfers in an equitable and fair manner. The Commission is mandated under the Constitution to make recommendations concerning the basis for the equitable sharing of revenue raised by the national government between (a) the National and County governments; and (b) among the County governments for the prosperity and economic empowerment of the people of Kenya.
The Summary of the Functions of the Commission as per Article 215 of the Constitution include:
Recommend the basis of equitable sharing of revenue raised nationally between the National and County governments.
Recommend the basis of equitable sharing of revenue raised by National Government among County governments.
Recommend on matters concerning financing of County and National governments.
Recommend on matters concerning financial management of County and National governments.
Define and enhance revenue sources of National and County governments.
Promote fiscal responsibility while making recommendations on the sharing of revenue.
To be consulted when any Bill is published concerning sharing of revenue or any financial matter concerning County governments.
To make recommendations on any Bill appropriating money out of the Equalization Fund.To determine, publish and regularly review the policy that sets out criteria for identifying marginalized areas.
PURPOSE OF THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE
The Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012 of the laws of Kenya requires that each public institution establishes a specific leadership and integrity code for state officers in accordance with the Act.
This Leadership and Integrity Code is intended to establish standards and norms of state officers at the CRA that will ensure respect for values, principles and requirements of the Constitution geared towards promotion, enforcement and compliance with integrity and the set designated ethical standards and norms.
This Code shall be cited as the Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers of the Commission on Revenue Allocation. It will apply to all State Officers at the Commission. It should be read in conjunction with Chapter Six of the Constitution of Kenya and the Public Officers Ethics Act (No. 4 of 2003) which forms part of this Code.
In this Code, “he” shall refer to both gender (man or woman).
A State Officer appointed to the Commission shall sign and commit to this Code at the time of taking oath of office or within seven (7) days of assuming office. A serving State Officer shall sign and commit to this Code seven (7) days upon publication of the Code in the Kenya Gazette.
Application
This code applies to all state officers at the Commission and any other state officers seconded or appointed to the Commission.
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Bank Account” means an account maintained by a bank or any other financial institution for in the name of, or in the name designated by, a customer of the bank or other financial institution and into which money is paid or withdrawn by or for the benefit of that customer or held in trust for that customer and in which the transactions between the customer and the bank or other financial institution are recorded;
 “Business Associate” means a person who does business with or on behalf of a State Officer and has express or implied authority from that State Officer;
 “Constitution” means the Constitution of Kenya promulgated in 2010;
 “Commission” means the Commission on Revenue Allocation (CRA);
“Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC)” means the Commission established under the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2011 (No. 22 of 2011);
 “Spouse” means a wife or husband;
 “State Office” means the definition as provided under Article 260 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
 “State Officer” means a member of the Commission on Revenue Allocation as provided under Article 260 of the Constitution and the Commission Secretary of the Commission as provided under Section 14(3) of the Commission on Revenue Allocation Act.
COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS
2.1   Rule of Law
(1)   Each State officer shall respect and abide by the Constitution and the laws of Kenya.
(2)   Each State officer shall carry out the duties of the office in accordance with the laws of Kenya.
(3)   In carrying out the duties of the office ,each State officer shall not violate the rights and fundamental freedoms of any person unless otherwise expressly provided for and in accordance with Article 24 of the Constitution
2.2   Public Trust
A State office is a position of public trust and the authority and responsibility vested in each State officer shall be exercised in the best interest of the people of Kenya.
2.3   Personal Responsibility and Duties
Subject to the Constitution and any other related law, each State Officer shall take personal responsibility for the reasonably foreseeable consequences of any actions or omissions arising from the discharge of the duties of his APPOINTMENT.
2.4   Performance of Duties
Each State officer shall, to the best of their ability—
(a) carry out the duties of the office efficiently, honestly with the highest degree of personal integrity;
(b) carry out the duties in a transparent and accountable manner;
(c) keep accurate record sand documents relating to the function soft heir respective role at the Commission; and
(d) report truthfully on all matters of the Commission.
2.5   Professionalism
Each State officer shall—
(a) carry out  duties of the office  in  a  manner  that  maintains public confidence for corporate integrity of the Commission;
(b) treat members of the public and other public officers with courtesy and respect;
(c) not discriminate against any person, except as is expressly provided by the law;
(d) to the extent appropriate to the Commission in its service delivery role, maintain high standards of performance and level of professionalism within and without the Commission; and
(e) where a State officer is a member of a professional body, observe and subscribe to the ethical and professional requirements of that body in so far as the requirements do not contravene the Constitution or this Act.
2.6      Financial integrity
(1) Each State officer shall not use the office to unlawfully or wrongfully enrich himself or herself or any other person.
(2) Subject to Article 76 (2) (b) of the Constitution each State officer shall not accept a personal loan or benefit which may compromise him in carrying out his statutory duties.
2.7      Moral and Ethical Requirements
(1) For the purposes of Articles 99(1)(b) and 193(1)(b) of the Constitution, each State officer shall observe and maintain the following ethical and moral requirements—
(a)      demonstrate honesty in the conduct of public affairs subject to the Public Officer Ethics Act (No. 4 of 2003);
(b) not engage in activities that amount to abuse of office;
(c) accurately and honestly represent information to the public;
(d) not engage in wrongful conduct in furtherance of personal benefit;
(e) not misuse public resources;
(f)  not discriminate against any person except as expressly provided for under the law;
(g) not falsify any records;
(h) not engage in actions which would lead to his removal from the membership of a professional body in accordance with the law; and
(i) not commit offences and in particular, any of the offences under Parts XV and XVI of the Penal Code (Cap. 63), the Sexual Offences Act (No. 3 of 2006), the Counter-Trafficking in Persons Act (No. 8 of 2010), and the Children Act (Cap. 141).
2.8 Gifts or Benefits Received in Kind
(1) A gift or donation given to each State officer on a public or official occasion shall be treated as a gift or donation to the State.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), each State officer may receive a gift given to the State officer in an official capacity, provided that—
(a) the gift is within the ordinary bounds of propriety, a usual expression of courtesy or protocol and within the ordinary standards of hospitality;
(b) the gift is not monetary; and
(c)  the gift does not exceed such value as may be prescribed by the Ethics and Anti – Corruption Commission from time to time.
(3) Without limiting the generality of subsection (2), each State officer shall not—
(a) accept or solicit gifts, hospitality or other benefits from a person who—
               (i)    has an interest that may be achieved by the carrying out or not carrying out of the State officer’s duties;
             (ii)    carries on regulated activities with respect to the Commission; or
            (iii)    has a contractual or legal relationship with the State officer’s organization;
(b) accept gifts of jeweler or other gifts comprising of precious metal or stones of ivory or any other animal part protected under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora; or
(c) any other type of gift specified by the Ethics and Anti- Corruption Commission from time to time.
(4) Each State officer shall not receive a gift which is given with the intention of compromising the integrity, objectivity or impartiality of the State officer.
2.9 Registration of Gifts
The Commission shall keep a Register of –
(a) gifts received by each State Officer
(b) gifts given by the Commission to its State Officers
Subject to subsection (2), any State officer who receives a gift or donation shall declare the gift or donation to the Commission Secretary of the Commission and the same shall be recorded in the Register of Gifts. Where a gift is given to a State Officer by the Commission, it shall be recorded in the Register of Gifts.
2.10 Wrongful or Unlawful Acquisition of Property
A State officer shall not use the office to wrongfully or unlawfully influence the acquisition of any property.
2.11 Conflict of Interest
(1) Each State officer shall use the best efforts to avoid being in a situation where personal interests conflict or appear to conflict with the State officer’s official duties.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), each State officer shall not hold shares or have any other interest in a corporation, partnership or other body, directly or indirectly through another person, if holding those shares or having that interest would result in a conflict of the State officer’s personal interests and the officer’s official duties.
(3) Each State  officer whose personal interests conflict with their official duties shall declare the personal interests to the Commission Secretary of the Commission or the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission.
(4) The Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission may give direction on the appropriate action to be taken by the State officer to avoid the conflict of interest and the State officer shall—
(a) comply with the directions accordingly; and
(b) refrain from participating in any deliberations with respect to the matter.
(5) Not with standing any directions to the contrary under
subsection (4), a State officer shall not award or influence the award of a contract to—
(a) himself or herself;
(b) the State officer’s spouse or child;
(c) a business associate or agent; or
(d) a corporation, private company, partnership or other body in which the State Officer has a substantial or controlling interest.
(6) In this section, “personal interest” includes the interest of a spouse, child, business associate or agent or any other matter in which the State officer or public officer has a direct or indirect pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest.
(7) Where a State officer is present at a meeting, where an issue which is likely to result in a conflict of interest is to be discussed, the State officer shall declare the interest at the beginning of the meeting or before the issue is deliberated upon.
(8) A declaration of a conflict of interest under subsection (7) shall be recorded in the minutes of that meeting.
(9) The Commission shall maintain an open register of conflicts of interest in which an affected State officer shall register the particulars of registrable interests, stating the nature and extent of the conflict.
(10) For purposes of subsection(9), the registrable interests include the interests set out in the First Schedule of this Code.
(11) The Commission shall keep the register of conflicts of interest for five years after the last entry in each volume of the register.
(12) It shall be the responsibility of the State officer to ensure that an entry of registrable interests under subsection(9) is updated and to notify the Commission or the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission of any changes in the registrable interests, within one month of each change occurring.
2.12 Participation in Commission Tenders
Each State officer shall not participate in a tender for the supply of goods or services to the Commission in which he or she is serving or is otherwise similarly associated, but the holding of shares by a State officer in accompany shall not be construed as participating in the tender of a public entity unless the State officer has a controlling shareholding in the company.
2.13 Public Collections
(1) Each State officer shall not solicit for contributions from the public for a public purpose within or without unless the President has, by notice in the Kenya Gazette, declared a national disaster and allowed a public collection for the purpose of the national disaster in accordance with the law.
(2) Each State officer shall not participate in a public collection of funds in a way that reflects adversely on that State officer’s integrity, impartiality or interferes with the performance of his official duties.
(3) Any person intending to be appointed as a State Officer shall submit to the EACC a self-declaration form set out in the First Schedule to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Act.
2.14 Bank Accounts Outside Kenya
(1)  Subject to Article 76 (2) of the Constitution or any other written law, each State officer shall not open or continue to operate a bank account outside Kenya without the approval of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission.
(2) Each State officer who has reasonable grounds for opening or operating a bank account outside Kenya shall apply to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission for approval to open or operate a bank account.
(3) Each State officer who operates or controls the operation of a bank account outside Kenya shall submit statements of the account annually to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission and shall authorize the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission to verify the statements and any other relevant information from the foreign financial institution in which the account is held.
(4) Subject to subsections (1) and (2), each State officer who operates a bank account outside Kenya shall declare the details of the bank account including its mandates to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption
Commission as soon as possible.
2.15 Acting for Foreigners
(1) Each State officer shall not be an agent of, or further the interests of a foreign government, organization or individual in a manner that may be detrimental to the security interests of Kenya, except when acting in the course of official duty.
(2)  For the purposes of this section—
(a) an individual is a foreign individual if the individual is not a citizen of Kenya; and
(b) an organization is a foreign organization if it is established outside Kenya or is owned or controlled by a foreign government, organization or individual.
2.16 Care of Public Property
(1) Each State officer shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that public property in the officer’s custody, possession or control is taken care of and is in good repair and condition and not to the detriment of the Commission’s image.
(2) Each State officer shall not use public property, funds or services that are acquired in the course of or as a result of the official duties, for activities that are not related to the official work of the State officer.
(3) Each State officer shall return to the issuing authority all the public property in their custody, possession or control at the end of the APPOINTMENT, or contract term or as per the  valid regulations as approved by the Commission.
(4) Each State officer who contravenes subsection (2) or (3) shall, in addition to any other penalties provided for under the Constitution, this Act or any other law be personally liable for any loss or damage to the public property.
2.17 Misuse of Official Information
(1) Each State officer shall not directly or indirectly use or allow any person under the officer’s authority to use any information obtained through or in connection with the office or during the course of his official position, which is not available in the public domain, for the furthering of any private interest, whether financial or otherwise.
(2) The provisions of subsection(1), shall not apply where the information is to be used for the purposes of—
(a) furthering the interests of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012;
(b) educational, research, literary, scientific or other purposes not prohibited by law; or
(c) for the general development of the vision and/or mandate of the Commission.
2.18 Political Neutrality
(1)  Each State officer shall not in the performance of their duties—
(a) act as an agent for, or further the interests of a political party or candidate in an election or any other political endeavors; or
(b) manifest support for or opposition to any political party or candidate in an election or any other political engagements.
(2) Each State officer shall not engage in any political activity that may compromise or be seen to compromise the political neutrality of the office subject to any laws relating to elections.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection(2)a public officer shall not—
(a) engage in the activities of any political party or candidate or act as an agent of a political party or a candidate in an election;
(b) publicly indicate support for or opposition against any political party or candidate participating in an election.
2.19 Impartiality
Each State officer shall, at all times, carry out the duties of the office with a high degree of impartiality and objectivity in accordance with Articles 10, 27, 73(2)(b) and 232 of the Constitution and shall not practice favoritism, nepotism, tribalism, cronyism, religious bias or
engage in corrupt or unethical practices.
2.20 Giving Advice
Each State officer who has a duty to give advice shall give honest, accurate and impartial advice without any fear or favor.
2.21 Gainful Employment
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a State officer who is serving on a fulltime basis shall not participate in any other gainful employment.
(2) In this section, “gainful employment” means work that a person can pursue and perform for money or other form of compensation or remuneration which is inherently incompatible with the responsibilities of the State office or which results in the impairment of the judgment of the State officer in the execution of the functions of the State office or results in a conflict of interest in terms of Clause 10.
2.22 Offers of Future Employment
(1) Each State officer shall not allow himself or herself to be influenced in the performance of their duties by plans or expectations for or offers of future employment or benefits.
(2) Each State officer shall disclose, in writing, to the public entity and the Commission, all offers of future employment or benefits that could place the State officer in a situation of conflict of interest.
2.23 Former State Officer Acting in a Government or Public Entity Matter
Each former State officer shall not be engaged by or act for a person or entity in a matter in which the officer was originally engaged in as a State officer, for at least two years after leaving the State office.
2.24 Misleading the Public
Each State officer shall not knowingly give false or misleading information to any person.
2.25 Falsification of Records
Each State officer shall not falsify any records or misrepresent information to the public.
2.26 Conduct of Private Affairs
Each State officer shall conduct private affairs in a manner that maintains public confidence and decorum in the integrity of the office.
2.27 Tax, Financial and Legal Obligations
(1) Each State officer shall pay any taxes due from him or her within the prescribed period.
(2) Each State officer shall not neglect their financial or legal obligations.
2.28 Bullying
(1) Each State officer shall not bully any person both within and without of the Commission.
(2) For purposes of subsection (1),“bullying” includes repeated offensive behavior which is vindictive, cruel, sexual advances, malicious or humiliating and is intended to undermine a person.
2.29 Acting Through Others
(1)  Each State officer contravenes this Code if the officer—
(a) causes anything to be done through another person that would constitute a contravention of the Code if done by the State officer; or
(b) allows or directs a person under their supervision or control to do anything that is in contravention of the Code.
(2) Subsection (1) (b) shall not apply where anything is done without the State officer’s knowledge or consent or if the State officer has taken reasonable steps to prevent it.
(3) Each State officer who acts under an unlawful direction shall be responsible for his or her action.
2.30 Reporting Improper Orders
(1) If a State officer considers that anything required of the misincontravention of this Code or is otherwise improper or unethical,
the State officer shall report the matter to the Commission Secretary.
(2) The Commission shall investigate the report and take appropriate action within ninety days of receiving the report.
2.31 Enforcement of the Code
(1) Any person may lodge a complaint alleging a breach of this Code by a State Officer to the Commission,  the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission or National Assembly.
(2) Breach of this Code amounts to misconduct for which the State Officer may be subjected to disciplinary proceedings including removal from office according to the relevant written laws.
(3) Where a breach of this Code amounts to a violation of the Constitution, the State Officer may be removed from office in accordance with Article 95(5)(a) and /or Article 251 of the Constitution.
 (4) Subject to the Constitution, the Leadership and Integrity Act, or any other related law a State Officer who is under investigation for breach of this Code, shall be suspended from office until such investigations are completed.
                                        First Schedule            (Clause 10(10)
REGISTRABLE INTERESTS
1.   Directorships in public or private companies, whether or not remunerated directly or indirectly.
2. Remunerated employment (including office, trade, profession or vocation which is remunerated or which the State officer has any pecuniary interest).
3.Securities (shares, bonds, debentures or any other similar holding) in a company or enterprise or undertaking the aggregate nominal or market value of which exceeds a prescribed value while the state officer was in office.
4. Contracts for supply of goods and services.
5. Plans or expectations for or offers of future employment.
6. Public affairs advice and services to clients.
7. Shareholdings (amounting or not amounting to a controlling interest).
8. Land and property.
9. Sponsorship (from companies, trade unions, professional bodies, charities, universities or other organizations or individuals).
10. Travel facilities and overseas visits (made by a State officer or the State officer’s spouse or child substantially catered for by the office of the State officer).
11. Gifts, benefits and hospitality (to a State officer or the State officer’s spouse or partner or child or any other material benefit of a prescribed value, from a company, organization or person within Kenya or overseas, which relates substantially to the membership of a state office to a state office or Parliament or County Assembly).
12. Miscellaneous financial interests (not falling within the above categories but which a reasonable member of the public would think might influence the conduct of a State Officer in his office).
13. Non-financial interests (which may reasonably be thought to affect the way a member discharges the duties in a State Office (such as unremunerated directorships; membership of public bodies such as hospital trusts, governing bodies of universities, colleges or schools, and other spheres of government; trusteeships, etc.).
14. Pending civil and criminal cases touching on the State officer or business associate or firm.
15. Possession of dual citizenship or pending applications for dual citizenship and the status of such application.
DECLARATION BY STATE OFFICER TO COMPLIANCE OF THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE FOR STATE OFFICERS OF THE COMMISSION ON REVENUE ALLOCATION
I…………………………………………………………………do hereby accept that I have fully read and understood the contents of the Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers for the Commission on 
Revenue Allocation and agree that I shall abide by it as required by the Leadership and Integrity Act (No. 19 of 2012).        
Signature:.....................................................................................
Date:............................................................................................
Witnessed by: .............................................................................
Signature:.....................................................................................
Date:............................................................................................
Dated the 10th August, 2015.
GEORGE OOKO,
MR/8195184                                              Commission Secretary.


