
				Page: 2406GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7480
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE JUDICIAL SERVICE ACT
(No. 1 of 2011)
BAIL AND BOND IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE
APPOINTMENT
FOLLOWING the launch and gazettement of the Bail and Bond Policy Guidelines, the National Council on the Administration of Justice (NCAJ), in its fifteenth meeting resolved that a Committee be established to oversee the implementation of the Bail and Bond Policy Guidelines and Recommendations of the Taskforce that developed them.
PURSUANT to the NCAJ resolution, and in line with the provisions of the Constitution and sections 5 and 34 of the Judicial Service Act, I, the Chief Justice of the Republic of Kenya and Chairperson of the National Council on the Administration of Justice appoint the following members to form the Committee with effect from 2nd July, 2015.
Composition of Committee
The Committee shall comprise the following members:
Lady Justice Jessie Lesiit—(Judiciary)—(Chairperson).
Mary Oundo (Ms.)—(Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions)—(Vice-Chairperson).
Clement Okech—(Probation and Aftercare Service)—(Secretary).
Henry Kipkosgei Barmao—(National Police Service).
Emmanuel Bitta—(Office of Attorney-General).
Kelvin Mogeni Tom—(Law Society of Kenya).
James Olola   (Independent Policing Oversight Authority).
Emmanuel Ndunda—(Kenya Prisons Service).
Mercy Muthuuri (Ms.)—(Kenya Law Reform Commission).
Commissioner Suzanne Chivusia—(Kenya National Commission on Human Rights).
Jacinta Murgor (Ms.)—(Children’s Department).
Lenson Njogu—(Legal Resources Foundation).
Njeri Thuku—(Judiciary Training Institute).
Robert Ngugi—(National Transport and Safety Authority).
Duncan Okello—(National Council on the Administration of Justice).
Facilitators:
Manuela Kinyanjui,
Petronella Mukaindo (Ms.),
Dorcas Mogere (Ms.),
Martha Mueni (Ms.),
1.  Terms of reference of the Committee:
The Committee shall ensure application of appropriate bail and bond policy measures in accordance with the Bail and Bond Policy Guidelines and the Recommendations of the Report of the Taskforce on Bail and Bond.
In fulfilment of the above broad mandate, the Committee shall in particular—
(a) conduct sensitization and training exercises among the relevant stakeholders and the public generally on the application of the bail and bond terms and related matters;
(b) engage the relevant actors as necessary to enable operationalization and the streamlining of the bail and bond processes across all relevat justice sector actors;
(c)  Recommend and/or undertake such measures, including legislative interventions as necessary to achieve the operationalization of the recommendations of the Taskforce by the relevant agencies.
(d) Monitor, evaluate and report on the implementation of the Bail and Bond Policy Guidelines and Recommendations contained in the Report of the Taskforce.
2.  The Committee shall—
(a) be guided by the Constitution;
(b) be guided by the Bail and Bond Policy Guidelines and the final Report of the Taskforce;
(c)  prepare a detailed work plan and cogent implementation strategy for its work;
(d) make rules to regulate its own procedure.
The Committee may—
(a)  co-opt such persons nominated by organisations identified by the Committee to be relevant for the discharge of its mandate;
(b) engage such expert(s) as may be necessary for better fulfilment of its tasks;
(c)  seek and mobilize financial support as is appropriate for effective realisation of its mandate.
The Committee shall regularly report to the Deputy Chief Justice.
The Committee shall apprise the National Council on the Administration of Justice on its progress as required.
At the end of the period, the Committee shall prepare a final Report, detailing the extent to which it achieved its mandate, the gaps if any and its recommendations.
The term of the Committee shall be for an initial period of twenty four (24) months from the effective date.
Dated the 30th September, 2015.
WILLY MUTUNGA,
Chief Justice and Chair,
National Council on the Administration of Justice.

