
				Page: 2407GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7483
TASKFORCE ON THE ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT OF ICT PERSONNEL
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communication and Technology has appointed a Taskforce on the organization and management of ICT personnel.
1.  The Taskforce shall comprise of the following—
Brown Ingabo Otuya—(Chairperson);
Members:
Jayne Songole,
Bernadette Maliti,
Felix Ongaga,
Wilfred Amolo,
Alice Nyariki,
Simon Indimuli,
Joint Secretaries:
Zipporah Mutahi,
Charity Kagiri,
Virginia Mwangi.
2.  The terms of reference of the Taskforce are—
(a) review the Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 118 of 2013 that established the ICTA and make recommendations where necessary;
(b) align ICT structures in the civil service in line with the ICT Authority mandate; and
(c) make recommendations on transition of ICT staff from the Civil Service into ICT Authority and modalities of management of ICT personnel who will not be absorbed by ICT Authority.
3.  In the performance of its functions, the Taskforce—
(a) shall prepare a detailed work plan;
(b) shall in consultation with the Cabinet Secretary, hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as it considers necessary for the proper discharge of its functions;
(c) shall make use of such official reports/documents relevant to its mandate;
(d) shall carry out or cause to be carried out such studies, research and evaluation as may inform on its mandate;
(e) may prepare any such documents related to the terms of reference.
(f)  may co-opt such other persons, who posses the appropriate competencies as are necessary for the performance of the terms of reference.
4.  The Taskforce shall have the powers necessary to undertake any matter incidental or ancillary to the matters stated herein.
5.  The Taskforce shall regulate its own procedure.
6.  The Secretariat of the Taskforce shal be based at the Offices of the ICT Authority.
7.  The Taskforce shall submit the final report to the Cabinet Secretary.
8.  The term of office of the Taskforce shall be for a period of two (2) months with effect from the date of its gazettement and the Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communication and Technology may when necessary, extend the period.
Dated the 15th September, 2015.
FRED MATIANG’I OKENGO,
Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communication and Technology.

