
				Page: 3273GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 11224
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED KENYA E-GOVERNMENT EXPANSION PROJECT IN FORTY SEVEN COUNTIES
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed Kenya e-Government Expansion Project in forty-seven counties.
The proposed project involves construction of fiber links as protection rings to improve NOFBI in government offices in Nairobi and the other seven provinces countrywide.
The e-government expansion project is to cover the following Counties in Kenya: Nairobi, Busia, Kericho, Kisii, Kisumu, Machakos, Malindi, Meru, Turkana, Uasin Gishu, Kiambu, Kirinyaga, Muranga, Nyandarua, Kilifi, Kwale, Lamu, Taita, Tana River, Isiolo, Kitui, Marsabit, Mandera, Wajir, Siaya, South Nyanza, Baringo, Elgeyo/Marakwet, Kajiado, Laikipia, Nandi, Narok, Samburu, Trans Nzoia, West Pokot, and Bungoma.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Terrestrial habitat alteration
 


Re-vegetation of disturbed areas with native plant species.
Undertake selective clearance by removing tall woody species leaving saplings, for quick regeneration of vegetation along the way-leave.


Noise and vibration


Sensitize the workforce and truck drivers on issues of equipment maintenance. Supervise construction traffic, maintain plant and equipment, undertake construction only during the daytime for peace of the neighbours, workers to wear ear plugs, muffs as part of the personal protective gear.


Aquatic habitat alteration


Minimizing clearing and disruption to riparian vegetation.


Risk of leaks or spills


Regular maintenance of site equipment.
Investigate the possibility of catalytic converters.
Safety procedures for fuel storage and refuelling.
Dispose of oil residues carefully.


Soil erosion
 


Soils excavated for the erection of towers should be used for re-filling and should not be left exposed to wind or water for long periods.
The contractor should avoid steep terrain during the transportation of construction material by using alternative routes or use light vehicles where appropriate.
Riverine vegetation should be minimally disturbed during the construction phase to reduce soil erosion and safeguard riverbank protection.
Re-plant degraded areas with local species common in the area to complement natural vegetation regeneration to improve ground cover.


Air pollution (dust, fuel emissions)
 


Control speed of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase on excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of plant and equipment.
Provision of dust masks for use when working in dusty conditions.


Contamination of ground and surface water
 


Maintenance of construction vehicles should be carried out in the Contractor’s camp and a recognized garage.
Proper storage, handling and disposal of oil wastes from machinery, discourage servicing of machinery and vehicles.


Management of solid Waste


Contractor must dispose solid wastes away from the site to an approved disposal site.
Temporary pit latrine for construction workers.


Working at heights.
 


Testing structures for integrity prior to  undertaking work.
Implementation of a fall protection program that includes training in climbing techniques and use of fall protection measures.
Inspection, maintenance, and replacement of fall protection equipment.
Installation of fixtures on tower components to facilitate fall protection systems.
An approved tool bag should be used for raising or lowering tools or materials to workers on structure.
Use of helmets and other protective devices will mitigate against scratches, bruises, punctures, lacerations and head injuries due to dropping objects.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Nairobi Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Rift Valley District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
SAMUEL MUNENE,
for Director-General,
MR8054929            National Environment Management Authority.

