
				Page: 3470GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 10841
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL FILLING STATION AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT NO. NYARIBARI MASABA/BONYAKONI/1362 & 1363, MASIMBA TOWNSHIP, KISII SOUTH DISTRICT
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed filling station and commercial development.
The actual design of the proposed development will comprise of:
(a) Petrol filling station (approx.6.4 by 13.2M)—
(i)       A canopy
(ii)     Pumps to dispense petrol, diesel and kerosene
(iii)    Three (3) underground storage tanks
(iv)    Service oils cabinet
(v)     Water access section
(vi)    Petroleum inlet section
(vii)  Oil gas vent pipes section
(b) Residential & Commercial development.
The proposed development is on two amalgamated plots on Plot Nos. Nyaribari Masaba/Bonyakoni 1362 & 1363 in Keroka-Nyangusu Road, Masimba which are approximately 0.04 Ha.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible impact


Mitigation measures


Impact on soil


Apply soil erosion control measures
Establish grass lawns, flower gardens and trees around and within the site


Impact on water resources


Take measures to reduce soil erosion and its deposition on drainage channel
Formulate and implement a water conservation programme during construction to ensure that wastage of water is minimized
Lay out properly lined drainage system


Air quality


Provide PPEs to the construction workers to minimize exposure. These should include dust masks, overalls and helmets
Erect barriers to minimize spread of dust to the neighborhood
Regular servicing and maintenance of construction vehicles to minimize toxic emissions
Switch off engines when not in use.


Noise and vibrations


Erect physical barriers to control noise and dust
Use of ear muffs by workers exposed to considerable noise level.


Traffic flow


Erect warning signs near the site
Provide adequate deceleration and acceleration lanes


Waste generation and management


Segregation of wastes at the source for ease of handling and disposal
Contract licensed waste transporter for disposal of waste
Waste minimization
Collection of wastes as soon as is produced
Re-use wastes where possible e.g. using excavated soil for back-filling and landscaping.


Health and safety


Use of appropriate PPEs (Dust masks, ear muffs, goggles, gloves, footwear, helmets etc.
Training on construction safety
Formulate safety guidelines and rules
Maintain food hygiene
Provide sanitation facilities including toilet and hand washing facilities
Use of safety belts while working on high and risky section of the building
Provision of adequate first aid facilities
Provide accommodation for clothing
Ladders should be properly fitted.
Remove sharps e.g. nails from timber to reduce risk


Soil and water pollution


No servicing or carwash should be carried out at the station unless proper mechanisms are put in place to trap possible contaminants. This could require an oil-interceptor or other appropriate pre-treatment facility.
Wastewater and run-off from the station should pass through an oil interceptor.
Rainwater harvesting should be practiced to reduce surface run-off which could transmit contaminants to the swamp
The floor of the station should be paved and an elaborate drainage system established.


Drainage


Practice rainwater harvesting
Construction of drainage system

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Nyanza Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Kisii South District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR8042690          National Environment Management Authority.

