
				Page: 3472GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 11223
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED SUBDIVISION OF 662 HECTARES OF KYANZAVI FARM, KYANZAVI SUB-LOCATION, KYANZAVI LOCATION, MATUNGULU DISTRICT
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed subdivision of 662 hectares of Kyanzavi farm.
The proponent proposes to subdivide 662 hectares not occupied by coffee plantations into 1890 agricultural plots to its members. This translates to 1.50 acres per share certificate. The coffee farms will be surveyed as individual plots and the title deeds registered in favour of the company i.e. Kyanzavi Farmers Company Ltd.
Kyanzavi farm is located in Kyanzavi location, Kyanzavi Division, Matungulu District. The farm is only 15 kilometers from Tala-Kangundo Township along the Tala - Thika highway. The farm is a combination of four farms i.e. L.R. No. 1846/4, 5846/3, 1848/2 and 1851/3/2. The farm has a total acreage of 1860 hectares
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental issue


Mitigation Measures


Pollution of water
 


Put “NO SWIMMING, BATHING, WASHING” signs near the dams.
Fence the dams and provide a buffer.
Provide water troughs at strategic points as animal watering points.
Introduce innovative solid waste disposal methods e.g. burning, composting.
Plant reeds and trees around the dams to sieve any effluent.
Awareness campaigns.
Construction of treatment ponds at the factory.


Uncontrolled water extraction


Install better filters at the coffee factory
Install water meters at extract point/Pumping station.


Soil Erosion


Terracing along contours.
 Protect slopes and catchments areas by construction and maintenance of artificial drains.
Afforestation.
Erect silt and soil traps.
 Community awareness on better farming techniques.


Deforestation


Planting woodlots (Each parcel holder to reserve 10% for woodlot planting).
Planting of trees on buffer of dams.


Silting of dams


Plant trees on the buffer of the dams.
Plant reeds to salve the soil before getting into the dams.
Terracing along contours.
Protect slopes and catchments areas by construction and maintenance of artificial drains.
Afforestation.
Erect silt and soil traps.
 Community awareness on better farming techniques.


Loss of flora and fauna


Plant more pine trees.
Conserve the dams by creating buffer zone and fencing.
Community awareness.


Depletion/ reduction of water supply
 


Afforestation.
Creation of buffer around the dams.
Metering water abstraction levels.
Drilling of boreholes to supplement existing water source.
Use of rain harvesting method e.g. water tanks, water pans.


Conflict on shared  water resources


Provide a pipe to a strategic point on the boundary of the farm where livestock can water.
Provide water troughs.
Provide access roads to the watering points.


Accident


 Put “NO SWIMMING BATHING, WASHING” signs near the dams.
Provide a shower next to the chemical chamber at the coffee factory.
 Provide railing bankers at the coffee barriers reception pits.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Eastern Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Machakos District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR8042778          National Environment Management Authority.

