
				Page: 3471GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 11222
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED SEISMIC SURVEY FOR BLOCKS
 L 10A & 10B
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed seismic survey for blocks L 10A & 10B.
The proponent proposes to conduct an offshore two dimensional (2-D) and three dimensional (3-D) seismic survey programme in exploration blocks L-10A and L-1OB off the Kenyan coast. The seismic survey programme will be undertaken to help determine whether there may be commercial deposits of oil and gas that can be produced from these two blocks.
The L-10A and L-10B Blocks are located offshore Mombasa in the south of Kenya, and adjoin Kenya’s marine border with Tanzania .The southern block L-10B is approximately 20 km north of Pemba Island, Tanzania.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental issue


Mitigation Measures


Mortality of cetacean or permanent damage to hearing and other sensitive parts.
Disruption to sensitive cetacean from introduction of submarine noise which could interfere with echo-location, feeding, communication and other behaviour.


Implement the Marine Mammals Management Plan which is to include:
Baseline surveys
Avoidance of key periods in the life cycle of some of the species
Surveillance throughout seismic activities
Use of suitably trained marine mammal observers (MMOs).
soft starts with shut down if animals observed within close range (i.e. less than 500 m)


Direct physical contact with cetaceans by passing streamer, tail buoy or air guns and/or impact cetaceans from contact with hull or propellers


Implement the Marine Mammals Management Plan specifically:
Surveillance throughout seismic activities
Towed passive acoustics
Shut down if animals observed within close range (i.e. less than 500 m)


Impact to cetaceans from accidental oil spill.


Implement contractor Fuel Management Plan which will include details of refuelling procedures in port and bunkering operations at sea


Disruption to sensitive turtles from introduction of submarine noise


Implement the Marine Mammals Management Plan which will adequately address concerns over impacts to turtles.


Direct physical contact with turtles by passing streamer, tail buoy or air guns, hull or propellers


Observation of turtles and reporting of any impacts by MMO.  If entanglement occurs with the equipment review design to assess whether modification can be made to reduce the risk of entanglement.


Potential impact to turtles from accidental oil spill.
Potential damage to corals from accidental oil spill or wastewater discharges


Implement contractor Fuel Management Plan which will include details of refuelling procedures in port and bunkering operations at sea.


Physical damage to corals from the streamers or tail buoy if sections are lost during operations


Controlled through the Contractor’s Streamer Recovery Plan.  This plan will detail the response procedures for finding and recovering a lost streamer and prevent it impacting any coast fishers or coral reefs.


Degradation of marine water quality from discharge of macerated food and effluent


Implement wastewater and waste management plans which comply with MARPOL 73/78 (including Regulation 8(1) (b) of Annex IV on Sewage and putrescible wastes disposal).


Degradation of marine water quality from accidental oil spill


Implement  Fuel Management Plan which will include details of refuelling procedures in port and bunkering operations at sea.


Disruption to fishing activities by damage to vessels or fishing equipment if tangled in streamer cable, tail buoy or air guns


Implement Community Consultation Plan to ensure that fishers avoid the areas of operation and ensure that boat has procedures to spot and communicate with any fishers that it encounters.  During consultation provide clear explanation of how Grievance Mechanism will be implemented.


Interruption to fishing, shipping and recreational activities during seismic survey operations


Implement Community Consultation Plan, which includes a Grievance Mechanism, to inform the fishers as to when the survey operations will be undertaken and where so as to ensure that fishers avoid the areas of operation (particularly the 2D survey area).  Community Consultation will identify the most efficient communication mechanisms for this information. 
Ensure that the support vessels for the seismic operations will have qualified staff on board who will be responsible for implementing procedures to take fishers out of the area if any are spotted and ensure that communications with the any fishers that are encountered are in the local language.


Potential accidental oil spill impacting fish


Contractor Fuel Management Plan which will include details of refuelling procedures in port and bunkering operations at sea.


Perceived/actual loss of livelihood.


Implement Community Consultation Plan, which includes a Grievance Mechanism, to inform the fishers as to when the survey operations will be being undertaken and where so as to ensure that fishers avoid the areas of operation (particularly the 2D survey area). 

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Coast Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Mombasa District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR8054810          National Environment Management Authority.

