
				Page: 1651GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5069
THE ALCOHOLIC DRINKS CONTROL ACT
(No. 4 of 2010)
APPOINTMENT OF AN INTER-AGENCY TASKFORCE FOR CONTROL OF POTABLE SPIRIT AND COMBAT OF ILLICIT BREWS
IT IS notified for the general information of the Public that the Cabinet Secretary for Interior and Co-ordination of National Government has appointed an Inter-Agency Taskforce for Control of Potable Spirits and Combat of Illicit Brews. The taskforce membership will comprise of the following:
Chairperson:
The Principal Secretary for Interior and Co-ordination of National Government or a representative.
Members:
A representative of the Council of Governors;
A representative of the Attorney-General and Department of Justice;
A representative of the Deputy Inspector-General in charge of Administration Police Service;
A representative of the Deputy Inspector-General in charge of Kenya Police Service;
A representative of the Government Chemist;
A representative of the Director of Public Health and Sanitation;
A representative of the Kenya Bureau of Standards;
A representative of the National Authority for the Campaign Against Alcohol and Drug Abuse (NACADA);
A representative of the National Intelligence Service;
A representative of the Directorate of Criminal Investigations;
A representative of the Anti-Counterfeit Agency;
A representative of the Kenya Revenue Authority; and
A representative of the National Youth Service.
Joint Secretaries:
Ministry of Interior and Co-ordination of National Government; and
The Attorney-General and Department of Justice.
Terms of Reference
1.  The Terms of Reference of the taskforce are to—
(a) undertake a full audit of all alcoholic drinks, potable spirits and illicit brews in the Kenyan market and the manufacturers thereof;
(b) recommend the suspension and recalling of harmful potable spirits and alcoholic drinks in the Kenyan market;
(c)  recommend the suspension and recalling of counterfeit potable spirits and alcoholic drinks in the Kenyan market;
(d) inspect all the premises manufacturing alcoholic drinks and recommend measures of control including the closure of production premises;
(e)  review the various legal instruments applicable in regulation of alcoholic drinks and in particular to advise on—
(i)       the gaps in the law as regards alcohol brewing, alcohol licensing and hours of drinking;
(ii)     regulation of raw materials used in the production of alcoholic drinks;
(iii)    penalties to be meted for actions and omissions under the law;
(iv)    appropriate policies and regulations on manufacturing, production, licensing and certification for alcoholic beverages; and
(v)     to recommend on packaging and labeling of alcoholic drinks.
(f)   recommend strategies and programmes for rehabilitation and treatment of alcoholic addicts by the National Youth Service;
(g) recommend strategies of sensitization and creation of awareness of alcohol and drug abuse; and
(h) recommend effective measures for control of alcohol abuse and the establishment of County Inter-Agency committees on alcohol abuse control.
2.  In the performance of its functions, the taskforce may—
(a) hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the Committee shall, in consultation with the Cabinet secretary, consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions;
(b) use official reports of any previous investigations, policies and legislation relevant to its mandate; and
(c) carry out or cause to be carried out such studies or researches as may inform the Committee on its mandate.
3.  The taskforce shall regulate its own procedure.
4.  The Secretariat of the taskforce shall be at the Ministry of Interior and Co-ordination of National Government, Harambee House, 6th Floor, Harambee Avenue, P.O. Box 30510–00100 Nairobi and all communication shall be addressed to the chairperson of the Taskforce.
Dated the 6th July, 2015.
JOSEPH NKAISSERY,
Cabinet secretary,
Interior and Co-ordination of National Government.

