
				Page: 2756GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6938
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OF 42 MAISONETTES ON PLOT NO. KISUMU NYALENDA ‘B’/663 KISUMU MUNICIPALITY, KISUMU COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Hippo Park Properties Limited) is proposing to develop  42 Maisonettes on Plot No. Kisumu Nyalenda ‘B’/663 Kisumu Municipality, Kisumu County
The proponent intends to construct 42 maisonettes that will include spacious rooms with master en-suit, large lounge, dining room, car park, fully fitted kitchen,single room servants’ quarters, and solar water heaters
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Potential Impact


Mitigation Measure


Sewage and effluent


Provide adequate sanitary facilities for workers.
Provide solid waste receptacles and storage containers, particularly for the disposal of plastic bags boxes, so as not to block drainage system and to prevent littering of the site.


Soil Erosion


Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and Increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.
Ensure that any compacted areas are ripped to reduce run-off.
Storm water drainage lines be well constructed to reduce incidence of pounding and flooding.


Air pollution


 Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes each day to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Controlling the speed of vehicles on the site.
Watering open soil or storage sites.
Selecting transportation routes.
Provide worker with dust masks.


Noise generation


Sensitize construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, residential areas and hospitals.
Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off vehicle or machinery not being used.
Ensure that all heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.
Measure to ensure that noise levels does not exceed 75dB(A)
Attenuation of any sound that may affect the inner ear by use of earplugs and earmuffs.


Safety and security


Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the construction site.
The Contractor should ensure strict safety management through close attention to design, work procedures, materials and equipment.
Develop a site safety action plan detailing safety equipment to be used, emergency procedures,restrictions on site, frequency and personnel responsible for safety inspections and controls.
All workmen should be provided with personal protective equipment (e.g. nose masks, ear muffs,helmets, overalls, industrial boots, etc).
There should be regular site reporting on health, safety and environment (HSE) issues by an appointed HSE representative, daily site inspections should be done to ensure safe work practices are adhered to.
All injuries that occur on site must be recorded in the accident registers and corrective actions for their prevention be instigated as appropriate (Section 62 of the Factories and Other Places of Work Act).



Fire hazards


Provide adequate number of appropriate firefighting equipment as well as fire exit options.
Ensure inspection and maintenance of fire equipment.
Train staff on fire management.
Fire management response should be available to everyone on site at all times.
A fire escape route and an emergency assembly point should be clearly indicated.


Solid waste
generation


Provision of dirt bins at strategic points of the compound and each respective house.
Disposal at the designated site.
Awareness creation among the building occupants.
Practice re-use and recycling methods as much as possible where applicable.
Encourage the use of NEMA approved waste handlers to manage waste.


Ventilation


Enough space must be provided within the premises to allow for adequate natural ventilation through circulation of fresh air.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kisumu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5834097              National Environment Management Authority.

