
				Page: 2755Gazette Notice No. 6937
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED COMMERCIAL BUILDING TOWER  FOR JABAVU VILLAGE LIMITED IN UPPERHILL, NAIROBI ON PLOT L.R. NO. 31/219
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Jabavu Village Limited, is proposing to construct a Commercial Building Tower on Land Title No.Nairobi/ Block 31/219 at the junction of Upper Hill Road and Haile Selassie Avenue. The project will entail putting up a multiple use premise(45-storey building) that will comprise of two towers; one approximately 212.40 meters high and another one of about 137.40 metres high and associated facilities like parking bays. The project plot area measures about 2.5 acres (1.002 ha).
The design for the commercial building tower provides for the construction of four components; a commercial component of about 30,000 square meters of total  floor area, a residential component of about 10,000 square meters of total floor area, a hotel of about 15, 000 square meters of total floor area and a retail component of maximum 15,000 square meters. This make the total planned development to have an accumulated total area of 70,000 square metres. The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


Control earthworks.
A storm water management plan that minimizes impervious area infiltration by use of recharge areas and use of detention and/or retention with graduated outlet control structure will be designed.
Install drainage structures properly.
Ensure management of excavation activities.
Landscaping of disturbed areas.


Increased solid waste generation


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: 1. Source reduction 2. Recycling 3. Composting and reuse 4. Combustion 5. Sanitary land filling.
Private waste disposal company to be contracted to transport and dispose the solid waste from site.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure to the elements.


Air pollution


Stockpiles of earth should be sprayed with water or covered during dry seasons.
Provide dust masks for the personnel in dust generation areas.
Sensitize construction workers on pollution control measurers.


Noise pollution


Sensitize workforce including drivers of construction vehicles.
Install sound barriers for pile driving activity.
Install portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationary equipment where necessary.
Put up signs to indicate construction activities.
Workers in the vicinity of high level noise to wear safety and protective gear.


Dust Generation


Spray stock piles of earth with water.
Avoid pouring dust materials from elevated areas to ground.
Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand and other loose materials.
Provide dust screen where necessary.
Personal Protective equipment to be worn always when at work place.


Exhaust Emissions


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible
Equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.


Liquid waste release into the environment


Provide adequate and safe means of handling liquid waste at the premises.
Conduct regular inspections for pipe blockages or damages and fix them appropriately.
Comply with the provisions of Environmental Management and Co-ordination(Water Quality)Regulations 2006.


Site cleanliness and sanitary facilities/Sewerage system


Special attention shall be paid to the sanitary facilities on site in liason with the County Government.
Garbage shall be disposed off periodically. 


Road safety and traffic


Road signs on main roads.
Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles.
Implement Traffic Management Plan.


Public health and occupational safety


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure dustbin cubicles are protected from animals, rains and are well covered.
Provide suitable safety gear for all personnel.
Proper treatment of waste water.


Vegetation disturbance


Care for the existing trees/plants.
Design and implement an appropriate landscaping Programme to help in re-vegetation of part of the project area after construction.
Designate access routes and parking within the site.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi City County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5749420           National Environment Management Authority.

