
				Page: 2757GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6939
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MERU – MAUA 132 kV ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION LINE
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Electricity Transmission Company) is proposing to:
Construct, operate and maintain one 132 kV single circuit overhead power transmission line over approximately 35 km from the Meru Substation to the new proposed Maua Substation. The line will require acquisition of about 105 hectares of Right of Way.
Construct, operate and maintain one 132/33 kV substation at Maua. The substation will require approximately 2 hectares of land. The equipment in the substation will include transformers, bus bars, circuit breakers, isolators and switchgears.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible  Impacts


Proposed Mitigation Impacts


Impacts on agricultural land


KETRACO to provide monetary compensation for cessation of land use and any loss associated with compromised land productivity.
Some of the access roads required during project implementation should be rehabilitated.


Impacts on drainage, surface waters and water resources


Positioning of towers away from natural drainages and floodways.
Position towers so as to leave a protection zone of 15 m at river and streams .
Channel effluents to septic tank and run-off from work surfaces to a retaining pond.


Potential aesthetic impacts


The OHTL routes have been established so as to meet the co-inhabitancy requirements imposed by the natural landscape.
Most of the transmission line route is away from main roads.


Electric and magnetic fields
 


The electro-magnetic field (EMF) decays very rapidly with distance from source and there should be no potential health risks for people living outside the 30 m wide way leave corridor.


Natural vegetation
 


Clearance during construction be done manually without burning the cleared vegetation.
Vegetation clearance within the forest areas be done under supervision of KFS staff.
Compensate value trees according to RAP recommendations.
Compensatory planting of trees.


Fauna
 


To be mitigated at specifically identified locations by use installation of colored warning spheres on the ground conductors atop the towers if found necessary later during operation.
Install danger sign and anti-climbing barbed wire for safety purposes on every steel tower.
Ensure a safety officer is present at all the times during the construction phase.


Land excavation, access roads and campsite
 


Designing transmission line route close to existing roads.
Rehabilitate temporary access roads after completion of works.
Minimize the number of new roads required.
Locate the campsite in such a way that they can have residual values like turning them into schools and other public facilities.


Soil erosion


Restrict use of heavy machinery and vehicles to designated work areas.
Install soil protection works in areas sensitive to erosion prior to undertaking construction.


Substance abuse and communicable disease control


Mount intensive campaign of awareness, prevention and treatment to be undertaken among the workers
Sensitization and education campaigns against substance abuse.
The construction sites, contractor’s accommodation areas, offices and store facility to have standard sanitation.
Employ non-skilled labour from within the community.


Solid waste
 


Re-use some of the excavated soil for backfilling while the rest to be disposed off at designated areas.
Dispose of waste in accordance with the NEMA guidelines. 


Impact on ambient air, dust
 


Set the route away from dense settlements.
Manage dust through use of dust suppressants.
 Provide aspirators to workers at high dust generation points.


Impacts on aviation and communication


Install warning spheres in areas close to Meru national park. Precautionary measures for any future development.


Potential hazards


A number of hazard management mechanisms could be devised to prevent and control potential hazards along the transmission line corridor and in the substation. These include prevention, control and management mechanisms. 


Bird strikes
 


If noted during operation:
Erect perching platforms on top of pylons.
Mark some of the wires to make them more visible to birds
Monitor number of electrocuted birds and those lost to collision and compare with published data to made decision on effectiveness of measures taken.


Increased cases of vandalism
 


Engage the public to report vandalism through use of manned hotlines.
Rapid response to deter any reported cases of impeding vandalism.
Consider use of advanced technology to deter vandalism by product modification or enhanced detection.
Lobby the Government to elevate the crime of vandalism of electrical installation to the level of economic sabotage.
Monitor number of attempted and accomplished vandalism.


Interference with cultural setup
 


Raise public awareness on the values of culture.
Support social activities that promote the local cultures through the CSR avenues.


Risk of fire outbreaks
 


Maintain the way-leaves free of fire fuel.
Partner with other agencies such as KWS and KFS in fire surveillance and fire fighting.
Prepare a fire preparedness and response plans for the substation and train members.
Equip Substation with appropriate firefighting equipment.
Undertake regular fire drills.
Monitor number of fire outbreaks

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Meru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Dated the 11th August, 2014.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5834310              National Environment Management Authority.

