
				Page: 3318Gazette Notice No. 8787
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PHASE 1 OF KAREN WATERFRONT ON L.R. No. 20587, KAREN, NAIROBI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Crossroads Limited) is proposing to develop phase 1 of the Karen Water Front in Karen within the Karen Triangle, between Karen Road, Karen Lane and Lang’ata Road in Nairobi County on LR No. 20587, and lies approximately 16km South West of the Nairobi Central Business District.
The proposed phase 1 will consist of a 2 storey building with 25,000 Square meters of gross leasable retail space overlooking a man-made lake.
Below is a summary of the anticipated impacts and the proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measure


Loss of biodiversity


Retain vegetation screens to reduce the visual effect of this stage of the development.
Clearance of vegetation should be done in necessary areas only.
After project completion, proponent should  carry out environmental compensation where harm cannot be avoided by use of indigenous plants.


Soil Degradation


Excavated soil to be used for back filling.
Limit the extent of use of heavy machinery at the site and control earth works.
Rocked construction entrance and exit  to keep sediment from being tracked onto adjacent roads and keep vehicles off bare soils.
Stock piles to be covered with tarpaulins.
Landscape all disturbed areas after construction phase.


Increase in water demand


Abstract  from boreholes as indicated in the WRMA permits.
Installation of toilet flushes with low volume cisterns.
Waste water recycling and rain water harvesting.


Air pollution


Spray water on exposed areas during dry weather to suppress dust.
Cover loads of friable materials during transportation.
Control speed of construction vehicles and switch off machines when not in use.
Regularly service and maintain vehicles and mobile plants and machinery.
Provide PPE e.g. nose masks to workers


Effluent management


Provision of portable toilets for the workers.
Routine checkups and monitoring of the WWTP to avoid leakages and blockages.
Proper construction of the WWTP to meet the standards required by  Nairobi County Council.
Construction of separate storm water and waste water drains.
Treated effluent to be reused as non potable water for flushing toilets, watering lawns and cleaning purposes.
Waste water to be treated to the standards set by NEMA (Water quality regulations, 2006) and effluent analysis to be conducted regularly.


Stream degradation


Creation of a  riparian buffer zone around the constructed wetland and river.
Proper canalisation of the stream as per  WRMA permit.
Routine check-ups and monitoring of the WWTP to avoid leakage and blockage.
Quarterly monitoring of the quality of the treated waste water as per the NEMA Water Quality standards.


Noise and vibrations
 
 


Workers working with machinery, vehicles and instruments that emit high levels of noise should be provided with ear plugs and ear muffs.
Proper servicing of machinery and equipment(oiling, greasing etc).
Installation of portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationary equipment where necessary.
Construction activities to be carried out between 8:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m.
Monitor noise levels as per NEMA guidelines.


Increase in Solid Wastes


Limit quantity by developing appropriate budgets for purchase of raw materials to reduce wastage through exposure to weather elements.
Provision of a waste transfer station within the development.
Segregation of waste at source through provision of separate bins.
Contract a duly licensed waste handler to transport waste.
Sludge from the WWTP to be incinerated and the ashes used to mould refractory bricks.


Occupational Health and Safety


Personnel to wear complete PPE.
Provision of fire fighting equipment.
Put in place an emergency response plan.
Only qualified personnel to operate the machinery.
Designate a Health & Safety officer to be in-charge of enforcing site compliance with OSH rules and regulations.
Provision of adequately stocked first aid kit and at least one trained first aider on site.
Display the contact numbers of the persons responsible for handling emergencies on the site.
Contractor should have workmen’s compensation cover which should comply with workmen’s compensation Act.


Traffic snarl ups


A traffic marshal shall to be stationed along the entry point within the project boundary to control vehicles during transportation of materials.
Planned deliveries to make sure they do not coincide with heavy traffic.
Provision of separate traffic routes for pedestrians and vehicles during operation phase.
Security checks to be conducted inside the compound NOT at the entrance.
Provision of designated entry and exit points.
Provision of slip lanes.


Population Increase


Planning of the development in such a way that there is adequate social and other infrastructure to meet needs of the tenants and their customers.


Sanitation


Provision of sufficient sanitary conveniences: hand washing stations, mobile toilets at work site.
Provision of clean water to the workforce.


Dehydration of personnel


Provide safe and clean drinking water.


HIV/AIDS


Erection of billboards to sensitize locals on the need to practice safe sex to help in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
Conduct awareness campaigns on HIV/AIDS among the workers and the locals. This can be undertaken by the various NGOs and government agencies in the county.
Provision of condoms to the workers.


Conflicts


Consultation with KLDA, site neighbours and stakeholders on the mitigation measures proposed for the negative impacts.
Where possible, offer women equal employment opportunities as men.
Communicate on project progress with the community members and alert on sections to be developed to reduce interference.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6254613         National Environment Management Authority.


