
				Page: 3321Gazette Notice No. 8975
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED NORTHERN COLLECTOR TUNNEL PHASE 1 IN KANGEMA AND KIGUMO SUB-COUNTIES OF MURANG’A COUNTY
PURSUANT to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Athi Water Services Board) is proposing to set up a Bulk Water Supply to Nairobi City – Northern Collector Tunnel, a Raw Water Pipeline, and Treated Water Pipeline to Kabete Reservoir Phase 1 in Kangema and Kigumo Sub-Counties of Murang’a County.
The Northern Collector Phase 1 (the Project) includes the following components:
Transfer of water from Maragua River, Irati River and Gikie River to Thika dam (Ndakaini dam);
Construction of raw water gravity main from Thika dam to the proposedWater Treatment Plant 6km downstream of Thika dam; Construction of Water Treatment Plant 6km downstream of the dam; and
Construction of 44km Treated Water gravity main up to Kabete reservoirs(capacity 1.60m3/s) via Ngethu and Gigiri Water Treatment Plants to meet thecity’s year 2017 water demand.
Below is a summary of the anticipated impacts and the proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Impacts during construction phase


Loss of land and resettlement; and economic displacement
 


Implement RAP before commencement of the construction works.


Increased risks of landslides and other Geological/ seismic hazards


Implement Geotechnical monitoring through Excavation Performance Review (EPR) system to continuously monitor the Geotechnical stability during the construction phase using appropriate instrumentation.
 
Formulate an emergency communication plan for alerting the local community where the need arises.
 


Soil erosion and sediment generation


The contractor must implement planned erosion control measures to avoid erosion in areas that are prone to erosion, e.g. steep slopes and drainage lines.
 
Ensure downstream water users are informed about any unprecedented release of heavily silted water into the river.
Sediment traps and barriers must be employed due to steep terrain.
 


Soil pollution


No vehicle/plant maintenance shall take place on undesignated site. In case of emergency, a drip tray shall be used to avoid diesel and / or oil spills.
 
Concrete mixing shall not be done on bare soil. Concrete must be mixed on mortarboards, a large metal sheet or concrete slab.
 
Excavated material shall be stockpiled at a demarcated site, within the construction zone.
 


Soil compaction


Vehicles must be kept on existing/designated roads/tracks where possible;
Rip compacted areas to reduce runoff and re-vegetate where required.
 


Surface and ground water pollution


Implement Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for working in water, including checks on equipment condition and refuelling protocols.
 
Ensure that all construction equipment and vehicles are serviced off site at licensed garages.
 
Any contaminated soil should be handled properly as hazardous waste and removed form site for safe disposal.
 


Overstretching local utilities; and
incidences of insecurity


Careful planning of construction camp.
 
Any contractor’s camp should have a comprehensive waste management and sanitation plan.
 
Any storage tanks and equipment should have correct labels and Material Safety Data Sheets.
 
Adequate Emergency Response Plan should be in place in the camps.
 


Oil spills


Vehicle maintenance should be done on purpose-built impervious concrete platforms with oil and grease traps.
 
Monitor effluent discharge from the oil skimming tanks. Effluent discharge shall not exceed 25 mg/litre or the limit specified by the NEMA.
 


Shifting of labour from tea picking to construction and Increased school drop-outs


The contractor should be encouraged to offer wages within the prevailing rates.
 
Contractor must abide by labour laws and avoid any employment of children.
 


Interference with migratory fishes


Minimize activities to areas of construction and initiate habitat restoration immediately after construction works are through.
 
Ensure sufficient compensation flow.
 


Riverine microhabitat alterations;
Loss of otter dens; and Loss of breeding and nursery grounds for fishes and invertebrates
 


Ensure adequate waste management plan is in place and in use from the onset of construction.
 
Systematic search, capture and safe release of otters inhabiting the right of way (for the weir structures) and fish pass).


Loss of vegetation cover and
Illegal logging of trees of conservation significance


Compensate for affected tea bushes and tree/woodlots before construction works begin and allow for salvage of affected timber.
 
Where encountered, plants of conservation importance should be avoided as feasible.
 
Ensure compliance with Wildlife (Conservation and Management) Act, 2013 and sensitize employees on the same.
 


Pressure on and disruption of utility services


Liaise with relevant utility service providers and roads authorities to minimize any service disruptions.
 
Ensure advance notice to all stakeholders including water service providers and KTDA of any planned disruptions.
 


Modification of landscape


Encourage reuse of spoil materials e.g. in roads construction and maintenance to reduce land area used for spoil storage.
 
Incorporate landscaping at adits and portals to camouflage the introduced concrete surfaces.
 


Growth of unplanned settlements


As much as feasible, the unskilled labour should be obtained from amongst the locals.
 
Liaise with Murang’a county government to control developments in the area and ensure provision of adequate services.
 


Destruction of unidentified physical cultural resources


Formulate a chance-find procedure for implementation whenever any archaeological sites are encountered.


Impacts during operation phase


Reduced downstream flow (affecting both domestic and ecological needs)


Ensure strict adherence to the proposed abstraction weirs operation principles.
 
Construct fish passes as planned and ensure they are regularly maintained.
 
Undertake wet season survey and subsequent annual aquatic fauna surveys to monitor trends and inform any further management interventions.
 
Conduct routine In-stream Flow Release compliance audit/monitoring once operation commences for management interventions.
 


Reduced water temperatures downstream


Encourage local communities to plant indigenous trees on the riparian lands to ensure water temperatures are not increased.
 


Deterioration of downstream water quality


Conduct regular water sampling and laboratory analysis to monitor the water quality variations.
 


Increased inflow into Githika river and Thika reservoir


For possible increased inundation of the riverine areas, stream channel expansion from the outfall may help to counter the increased flow. Installation of a gauging station after outfall, will help monitor the water levels changes, so as appropriate measures can be taken; and
 
Ensure that the new off take is continuously operational at optimal levels to evacuate the increased volumes.
 


Changes in riverine and riparian floral compositions


Observe the minimum ecological flow after intake for R. Maragua, R. Irati  and R. Gikigie.
 
Undertake continuous ecological monitoring of hydrophytes and high water specific species to track and mitigate any emerging impacts of the project on the plants.


Changes in riverine and riparian floral compositions


The riparian extent of the project affected rivers should be defined by WRMA and be enforced to prevent people farming up to the river banks to reduce siltation.
 


Safety risks during tunnel maintenance operations


AWSB should establish and implement NCT1 tunnel specific comprehensive O&M Safety and Health Management Plan.
 


Concerns of dam safety


Review and update the existing safety and Emergency Plan for Thika dam.
 


Loss of water


Monitor volumes at intakes and outfall to allow loss detection; and
 
Ensure regular inspection and maintenance of the tunnel.
 


Impeded migration of fish


Test and evaluate efficacy of fish passes within the first two years of commissioning.
 


Spoil generation


Maximise the re-use of excavated materials in the works as far as feasible.
 
Properly dispose of the spoil in the approved spoil sites identified by the design team.
 


Waste handling challenges


The contractor should enforce the appropriate management methods based on the three Rs (Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle).
 
Final disposal of the site waste should be done at a location that shall be approved by Resident Engineer in accordance with the Waste Management Plan after consultation with the relevant stakeholders, including the County Administration and local community.
 


Liquid waste pollution


All grey water runoff or uncontrolled discharges from the site/working areas to water courses should be contained and properly channeled.
 
Water containing such pollutants as cements, concrete, lime, chemicals and fuels shall be discharged into a conservancy tank for removal from site.
 


Dust nuisance and toxic emissions with respiratory health problems


Vehicles delivering soil materials should be covered to reduce dust emissions.
 
Consider watering of the access roads during dry season to suppress dust.
 
Provide dust masks to all personnel on dust-prone work sites.
 
All construction machinery should be maintained and serviced in accordance with the equipment specifications and manufacturer’s standards.
 


Noise nuisance and related health problems


Noise levels shall be kept within acceptable limits preferably as stipulated within the Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) Control Regulations, 2009.
 
Monitor noise and vibration in sensitive locations above the tunnel and along the haulage routes to ensure the NEMA requirements are met.
 
Equipment should be maintained regularly to reduce noise resulting from friction.
 
Workers exposed to high-level noise must wear personal protective equipment (PPE).


Generation of Ozone depleting gases


Ensure use of approved fuels from licensed suppliers only.
 
Ensure that any cooling units installed at the camps only use ozone friendly coolants in compliance with NEMA guidelines.
 


Social delinquency and spread of STIs including HIV/AIDS


Ensure the contractor liaises with local public health officials and NGO’s within the project area in educating the community.
 
Locate construction camps away from concentration of schools; and,
 
The contractor should ensure that the project workers are sensitised on the local culture.


Traffic inconveniences and damage to local roads


Ensure the local roads and bridges to be used by the project are improved before construction works start.
 
Ensure that all regulations relating to traffic management are observed and notify the local traffic officials and KTDA of the construction activities; and
 
Install appropriate traffic warning signage and enforce speed limits for construction vehicles on the project affected roads.
 


Safety and health risks to workers and the general public


The contractor should ensure compliance with all standards and legally required health and safety procedures in line with OSHA, 2007 and associated rules and regulations.
 
Implement the specified H&S programme throughout the construction period.
 

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Murang’a County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6254546         National Environment Management Authority.

