
				Page: 2944GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 9205
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC SUBMIT COMMENTS ON THE DRAFT STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT REPORT IN THE MASTERPLAN FOR LEAATHER INDUSTRIAL PARK.
Pursuant to Section 57 (A) of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Amended) Act, 2015, Regulations 42 and 43 of the Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations Legal Notice No.101 of 2003 and the National Guidelines for Strategic Environmental Assessment, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received a Draft Strategic Environmental Assessment Report For The Masterplan For Leather Industrial Park. The SEA findings are also expected to integrate the existing sectoral plans and programs to establish sustainable economic zone development mechanisms.
The Export Processing Zones Authority (EPZA), a State corporation of the Government of Kenya under the Ministry of Industrialization and Enterprise Development (MoIED) is the owner of the Master plan. The plan is a Kenya Vision 2030 flagship project aimed at boosting the Manufacturing Sector GDP towards securing the overall goal of transforming the country into a newly industrialized middle income economy providing high quality life for all citizens by the year 2030.
The Master plan for the Leather Industrial Park is situated on LR No. 23961, a 301.1ha EPZA property located within the Kinanie Division of Athi River Sub-county within Machakos County. The site is situated about 16 kilometres east of Athi River Town and can be accessed through the Mutonguni (C434) Rd connecting Mombasa Road to the Kangundo Road. On the ground, the sites franks Mbagathi River adjacent to the EPZA operated sewage treatment plant located about 4km East of the Kinanie Center.
The land use plan for Leather Industrial Park at Kinanie has taken into account the following:
(i)       Planning jurisdictions within the area,
(ii)     Promotion of the economic contribution of the Leather Sector in Kenya,
(iii)    The need to provide for forward and backward linkages in leather value addition,
(iv)    Need to optimize on pre-existing resources,
(v)     Minimization of adverse social and environmental impacts
Design of the Master plan for the Leather Industrial Park allows for components as follows:
Tanneries
Value Addition Parks
An Administrative  Center
Research and Development Center
SMEs
Trade Center
Power Sub station
Transmission line
Logistics and Customs Offices
Residential Area
Internal Infrastructure
Common Effluent Treatment Plant including a sanitary landfill site
The primary goal of the SEA Study in the Leather Industrial Park is to provide a clear but flexible framework to ensure harmonious integration of the Master plan into local and national planning initiatives with minimal environmental and social shocks. The SEA seeks to secure development of a Leather City that is technically sound, economically sustainable and socially acceptable with benefits accruing to Kinanie, County and National Government Levels. 
Specifically, this SEA Study targets objectives as follows:
(i)      To identify environmental and social priorities and key linkages between environmental protection and trade growth in the Master plan area and beyond,;
(ii)     To assess likely significant effects of Leather Industrial Park development on these environmental and social priorities and key linkages;
(iii)   To formulate a set of measures to address these priority concerns and to take advantage of opportunities that will emerge from Leather Industrial Park development, considering institutional and financial conditions needed for implementing such proposal; and,
(iv)   To recommend mechanisms that will enable future adjustments to maintain and promote sustainable and equitable economic/trade growth in response to phased and gradual development of the Leather Industrial Park.
The key potential negative impacts and recommended mitigation measures in implementing the Master plan for the Leather Industrial Park are highlighted below:

Category 


Nature of Impact 


Recommendations


Pre-existing impacts/concerns


Nuisances (odour, dust) and hazards posed by operation of sewerage disposal activities in Kinanie.


EPZA to continue mobilizing the support of other stakeholders in resolving concerns associated with operation of the sewerage plant including regulation of independent sewerage service providers.


Pollution concerns posed by non-authorised connections to the EPZA sewer line.


NEMA to exploit available options in reigning in enforcing requirements of Legal Notice 120 of EMCA.


Pollution load from non-treated sewerage effluent from Athi-river based factories .


As above


General Concerns


Potential to induce non planned development at Kinanie.
 


Proponent to collaborate with the Machakos County Government to ensure adoption of zoned development at Kinanie in line with Cap 264.


Cumulative degradation of habitat for wildlife in Kinanie Division.


Remaining herds of herbivores to be accommodated within the confines of the Leather Industrial Park towards maintaining minimum viable populations.


Impacts associated with operation of tanneries and other investments at Kinanie


Cumulative pressure on the limited surface and groundwater resource base of Athi River basin.


Proponent to collaborate with sectoral Lead agencies (Wrma, Tanathi, Mavwasco, Awsb (Nairobi Wssco)  to develop a masterplan providing for water Demand Management in the Leather Industrial Park and associated Leather City.


Cumulative pollution loading in the Mbagathi-Athi system currently already polluted by draining Nairobi, Thika, Athi River, Machakos and Kitui Towns.


Adoption of a Leather Industrial Park Model which is heavy on value addition and lean on tannery development at Kinanie.
Each Investment to undergo mandatory EIA cycle
Upfront development of a Common Effluent Treatment Plant and Sanitary Landfill to be operated in line with LNs 120/121 of EMCA
Participatory monitoring of activities of all investors.


Erosion of environmental quality at Kinanie due to solid, liquid and atmospheric pollutants generated in the Leather Industrial Park.


As above


Introduction of invasive/alien species in construction materials


Screening of sites targeted for material exploitation


Social and economic impacts


Degradation of local labour-force due to poor wages and working conditions.


Participatory vetting of potential investors.
Adherence to OSHA, 2007.
Adoption of an institutional framework allowing for local participation.


Inadequate domestic market for value added leather and leather products can hurt investors who currently process wet blue grade leather for export.


The EPZA and partners in the Leather Industrial Park should aggressively address all barriers to market penetration for locally produced finished leather and leather products.


Marginalization of current players in the leather value chain.


Adoption of a Leather Industrial Park model that accommodates current players including access to quality inputs.


Other concerns


Possible disconnect with other sectoral laws, strategies.


Development and implementation of the Master plan for Leather Industrial Park will conform to reigning policy-legal framework at both County and National Government Level.

 
The full Draft Strategic Environmental Assessment for the Master Plan for the Leather Industrial Park is available for inspection during working hours at is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a)  Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources and Regional Development Authorities, N.H.I.F. Building,
P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(b) Director General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839-00200, Nairobi.
(c)  County Director of Environment, Machakos County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
for Director-General,
MR/8473281           National Environment Management Authority.

