
				Page: 2943GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 9012
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
Notice to the Public to Submit Comments on an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the Proposed Sanitary Landfill Development, Project at the Existing Kang'oki Dumpsite, Thika Sub County in Kiambu County
PURSUANT to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, County Government of Kiambu, is proposing a Sanitary Landfill Development Project at the Existing Kang'oki Dumpsite, Thika Sub County in Kiambu County.
The Project involves the construction of terraceed levels (2m cell lifts) approximately to a maximum height of 10 m. At every 10 m interval, storm water cut-off trench will be constructed at the foot of the next level. The trench will divert external uncontaminated water around the waste work face and will form part of the next level excavations for cover material. The base of every lift is sloped towards the internal drainage system in the center of the work area. Runoff will be diverted into the clean water trenches of the internal drainage system. The runoff diverted around the landfill will discharged into the natural environment downstream of the landfill.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental/Social Impact 


Proposed Mitigation Measures 


Air Pollution
 


Covering the site with sieves/ gunny bags to minimize pollution.
Control speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Spray water on excavated areas.
Maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Sensitize construction workers.
All bare areas should be landscaped after construction.
Workers should be provided with dust masks while working in the site.
Conduct air quality analysis periodically.


Leachate


Onsite leachate treatment facility to be installed for treating polluted water and leachate.
Regular monitoring of the color of the leachate Conduct water quality analysis on the adjacent water sources.
A drainage system in the landfill cell which will drain all new leachate from the landfill cell.
To prevent the production of new leachate, surface waters should be separated as much as possible from the pollution source.
To reduce the infiltration in the landfill mass, wastes should be covered by impermeable layers   (clay layer of 0.5m; K <1.10-9 m/s).


Water contamination


Every effort should be made to ensure that any chemicals or hazardous substances do not contaminate the soil or water on-site.
Site staff should not be permitted to use any stream, river, other open water body, or natural water source adjacent to or within the designated site for the purposes of bathing, washing of clothing, or for any construction or related activities. Municipal water (or another source approved by the environment management specialist) should instead be used for all activities such as washing of equipment or disposal of any type of waste, dust suppression, concrete mixing, compacting etc.
All concrete mixing must take place on a designated, impermeable surface.
No vehicles transporting cover materials to the site may be washed on-site.
No vehicles transporting, placing, or compacting asphalt or any other bituminous product may be washed on-site.
All substances required for vehicle maintenance and repair must be stored in sealed containers until they can be disposed of removed from the site.
Hazardous substance/ materials are to be transported in sealed containers or bags.


Soil erosion and compaction


Provide soils conservation structures on the areas prone to soil erosion to reduce impact of run off.
All bare areas should be well landscaped after completion.
The proponent at the decommissioning phase will rehabilitate the land by loosening the soil.
The contractor will always use a pre-determined route to the site.
Unnecessary heavy machines will be avoided.
Use of cheap tools like jambs, forks, mattocks and shovels will be encouraged to do the ground breaking.
Operations will be timed to take place during the dry season when the soils are dry to reduce the risk of soil compaction.
Avoid unnecessary movement of soil materials from the site.
Provide soil conservation structures on the areas prone to soil erosion mostly to reduce impact by the run-off.
Control construction activities especially during rainy conditions.
Re-surface surface areas after completion of the project and introduce appropriate vegetation.
Provide suitable storm water drainage channels to effectively discharge water to safe areas. Channels need to be regularly maintained and repaired to avoid point discharge in case of breakages or blockages.
Conduct landscaping after the project completion to maximally control any possible chance of soil movement.

Waste water (Run-off)


Construction of well-maintained drains to effectively manage surface run off.
Presence of well-maintained sanitary facilities for the workers and visitors to the site.
During construction, the design of the drainage system should ensure that surface flow is drained suitably into the existing drainage channels or the sewer system.
Drainage channels should be installed in all areas that generate or receive surface water such as car parking, drive ways and along the building block-edges of the roofs.
Channels should be covered by approved materials to prevent occurrence of accidents and entry of dirt that would compromise flow of run off.
Drainage channels should ensure safe disposal of runoff/surface water and should be self-cleaning.
Paving of the sidewalks, driveways and other open area should be done using pervious materials to encourage recharge and thus reducing water runoff volume.
The proponent should ensure that regular checks for the sewer line are done to avoid blockages or damages of pipes.


Fire preparedness


There should be a member of staff who is trained in fire preparedness and response who is always within the development.
Delineate a fire marshal for the resort to coordinate proceedings in case of a fire emergency.
Firefighting drills carried out regularly.
Firefighting emergency response plan.
Ensure firefighting equipment are in place and regularly maintained, serviced and inspected.
Train workers on fire fighting skills.
Fire hazard signs and directions to emergency exit, route to follow and assembly point in case of any fire incidence.


Occupational health and safety


The site shall be registered with the Directorate of Occupational Health and Safety.
All workers MUST be provided with full protective gear. These include working boots, overalls, helmets, goggles, earmuffs, masks and gloves.
All visitors, Consultants and inspectors coming into the construction site, MUST be issued with the appropriate PPEs including helmets, overcoats, goggles etc.
Construction crew at the site will be sensitized on social issues such as drugs, alcohol diseases.
A first aid kit should be provided within the site. This should be fully equipped at all times and should be managed by qualified person.
The contractor should have workmen’s compensation cover. It should comply with the workmen’s compensation act, as well as ordinances, regulations and union agreements.
Food handlers preparing food the workers at the site should be controlled and monitored to ensure that food is hygienically prepared.



The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a)      Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community Area, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi
(b)     Director General, NEMA Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839-00200, Nairobi
(c)      County Director of Environment, Kiambu County
A copy of the EIA report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision-making process for this project. Kindly quote ref. no. NEMA/EIA/5/2/1221
Comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke
KODIA BISIA,
MR/ 8449268                                                 for Director-General.

