
				Page: 1715GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4571
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MASEKI FILLING STATION ALONG MATINYANI-MASEKI ROAD ON PLOT L.R. NO. 899, MASEKI SUB-LOCATION, MUTULU LOCATION, MATINYANI DISTRICT, KITUI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Tesa Holdings Company Limited) is proposing to construct a filling station along Matinyani-Maseki Road on Plot L.R. No. 899, Maseki Sub-Location, Mutulu Location, Matinyani District, Kitui County
The proposed project will include the following components:-ago pipes, PMS pump
IK Pump,IK tank with a carrying capacity of 5000 litres ,2 in number ago tanks of each with a carrying capacity of 5000 litres ,a shop and 2 offices, Pipe ditch, Storm water drain and a cabro slab
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts 


Proposed Mitigation measures 


Air pollution


Control speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Spray water on excavated areas.
Maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Sensitize construction workers.
All bare areas should be landscaped after construction.
Workers should be provided with dust masks if working in sensitive areas.


Noise pollution


Maintain plant equipment.
 Construction should be carried out only during daytime i.e. 0800 – 1700 HRS.
 Workers to wear ear muffs if working in noisy section.
Management to ensure that noise from the residents is kept within reasonable levels.


Solid waste


Construction debris should be collected by a licensed private contracted waste collection company.
Excavation waste should be re-used or backfilled.
Waste generated should be collected by a privately contracted waste collection company and the contractor should ensure the construction of a central waste collection point with bulk storage facilities.
The site should have waste receptacles with bulk storage facilities at convenient points to prevent littering during occupation.


Oil leaks and spills


Machinery should be well maintained to prevent oil leaks.
Contractor should have a designated area where maintenance is carried out and that is protected from rain water.
All oil products should be stored in a site store and handled carefully.
An oil interceptor (API Style) should be provided at drainage channels.


Security


Control of secondary businesses.
Round the clock security for the facility.
Adequate lighting and an alarm system installed at strategic points.
Bushes around and within the site cleared to avoid hiding areas for thieves.


Occupational Health
and Safety


Provide Personal Protective Equipment
Train workers on personal safety and how to handle equipments and machines.
A well stocked first aid kit shall be maintained by a qualified personnel.
Report any accidents / incidences and treat and compensate affected workers
Provide sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences which should be kept clean.


Traffic density


Proper signage put in place to notify neighbors of the activity and presence of heavy vehicles and to direct traffic.
Presence of boards directing patrons to the site.
 Strict adherence to traffic rules.


Fire preparedness


Fire fighting drills carried out regularly.
Fire fighting emergency response plan.
Ensure all firefighting equipment are regularly maintained, serviced and inspected.
Fire hazard signs and directions to emergency exit, route to follow and assembly point in case of any fire incidence.


Waste water disposal


Waste water should empty to the septic tank via well laid sewage pipes.
Conduct inspections for sewer pipe blockages or damages and fix them.
Empty septic tank whenever its full by a licensed exhauster services damages and fix them.
Empty septic tank whenever its full by a licensed exhauster services.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kitui County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048283              National Environment Management Authority.

