
				Page: 1684GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4611
TASK FORCE OF TOURISM RECOVERY
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for information of the general public that the Cabinet Secretary for East African Affairs, Commerce and Tourism has appointed the Task Force on Tourism Recovery to advice the Government on the recovery of the Tourism Sector.

1. The Committee shall comprise of the following persons: Lucy Karume—(Chairperson)
Ibrahim Mohamed—(Vice-Chairperson)
Robert Marini
Muriithi Ndegwa
J. S. Vohra
Adam Jillo
Chris Modigell 
Philemon Mwavala
 Cecil Miller
Donald Kipkorir
Julius Kipngetich (Dr.)
Jostine Machuma Barmao
Wiliam Kibet Kiprono 
Nicholas Bondo
John Mruttu
Chris Diaz
Alice Mwololo

The Secretariat to the Committee shall comprise of:
Mary Luseka
Kaplich Barsito
2.The terms of reference of the Committee shall be:
(a) Identify challenges affecting the sector and come up with an immediate recovery strategy.
(b) Develop a strategy to address underlying challenges and position Kenya as a preferred destination for safari, Beach, commercial, sports, educational, health and business conferencing destination.
(c) Promote inclusiveness amongst stakeholders in resolving the issues facing the sector;
(d) Develop a integrated communication campaign/rebranding as appropriate.
(e) Lobby and work with other stakeholders to re-position the tourism sector as a mojor contributor to the gross domestic product and economy.
(f) Work closely with industry stakeholders to incorporate resilience building measures into tourism plans.
(g) Develop an action plan to mitigate future challenges and make recommendations for remedial actions.
(h) Document lessons learnt for future reference.
(i) Any other business as may be assigned by the CabinetSecretary.
3. In the performance of its functions, the committee may, from time to time, co-opt such additional persons with relevant expertise to assist it on specialized aspects of its mandate.
4. The Secretariat of the committee shall be at 18th Floor, Teleposta Towers, P.O. Box 30430–00100, Nairobi, Kenya.
5. Duration: The membership of the committee and the secretariat shall serve for three (3) months with effect from the date of this notice.
Dated the 24th June, 2014.
PHYLLIS J. KANDIE,
Cabinet Secretary,
Ministry of East African Affairs, Commerce and Tourism.

