
				Page: 941GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  1579
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CERAMIC FACTORY ON PLOT L.R. NO. KJD/DALALEKUTUK/1320 IN INKWANCHANI VILLAGE, KAJIADO COUNTY.
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Twyford Ceramics Company Limited, is proposing a ceramic factory on Plot L.R. No. Kjd/Dalalekutuk/1320 in Inkwanchani Village, Kajiado County.
The project shall entail development of the factory’s facilities such as the warehouse, dormitories, waste management plant, water resources, establishment of energy sources including KPLC power, constructing a concrete perimeter fence, crushing fields, among other amenities. Once operational, the factory shall process ceramics and floor/wall tiles.
The project shall be done in two phases. Phase I shall comprise construction of a dormitory, a warehouse, Office block, sources of energy, perimeter wall and later on Boreholes. On the other hand, phase II shall entail construction of the remaining Dormitories, two warehouses plus other facilities.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Potential impacts 


 Mitigation measures 


CONSTRUCTION PHASE


Vegetation Loss


Vegetation loss is set to be confined to the project location and will mainly consist of grass and weeds as the ground is not in use.


Increase in solid wastes 
 


The waste designated area will be well protected from the elements to ensure reduced chances of them being carried away by wind or rain.
Surplus material that cannot be reused in any way will be removed from site by licensed waste handlers.
Solid wastes will be sorted for its different components.  There shall be different waste bins for emptying at dry garbage and wet garbage areas.
These wastes will invariably be sent to recycling depots.
Transport of such waste to follow the laid down regulations.


Dust Emissions
 


Water to be sprinkled on the earth surface
Control of speed and operation of construction vehicles
Prohibit prolonged engine idling
Maintenance of plant and equipment
All bare areas should be landscaped after construction to reduce dust
Provide respiratory protection devices


Noise pollution 
 


Construction work to be restricted today time only.
Constructor to be advised to use well serviced machines.


Traffic congestion and obstruction 


Scheduling for material delivery
Trucks to be parked at the site


Occupational health and safety risks 
 


Employees to be provided with appropriate personal protective clothing
First aid services to be readily available on site
Firefighting equipment to be provided at the site


Storm water 
 


Constructor to provide proper drainage trenches with barriers to prevent erosion of soil by storm water


OPERATION PHASE


Fire hazard 
 


Provision of firefighting appliances
Making clearly the fire points at the site
Workers trained on how to avoid fire incidents


Increase in waste water generation and solid waste


Waste water will be recycled after primary settling, mud pressure filtration, separation of water and mud.


Increase in traffic to the surrounding 
 


Proper signage to be put in place to notify neighbors of the activity and presence of heavy vehicles
Strict adherence to the traffic rules


Occupational health and safety risks 
 


Employees to be provided with appropriate personal protective clothing
First aid services to be available on site.
Provision of proper sanitary facilities for employees


Micro Climate Modification


Ensure there will be an area within the site planted with grass and flowers to give the plant some beauty and coolness
Ensure that areas outside the perimeter wall are planted with short indigenous trees and flowers to reduce the heat and for beauty of the surrounding.


Security


Installation of an entrance and exit security check. 
Well trained security officers from a reputable company to patrol the grounds.
The company should install an internal surveillance system that will monitor the plant at all times.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8808065         National Environment Management Authority.

