
				Page: 940
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1578
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED EXPANSION OF MOMBASA CEMENT VIPINGO CLINKER AND CEMENT PRODUCTION PLANT, KILIFI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Mombasa Cement Limited (Vipingo Unit) proposed an expansion that will involve construction of two new cement factories for the manufacture of clinker and cement. The components of the expansion will include construction of a boundary wall to enclose each new cement factory, limestone crusher, limestone pre-blending stockpile, additive storages, raw material hoppers, raw mill building and bag house, blending silo, kiln feed, preheater tower, rotary kiln, clinker cooler building, clinker transport conveyer, clinker storage, gypsum storage, pozzolanastorage, coal stockpile, coal mill building, cement mill hoppers, cement mill building, cement silos, cement packing plant, cement loading for dispatch, clinker dispatch station, main sub-station, central control room, laboratories, engineering offices, stores, weighbridges, dispatch offices, water reservoirs and water treatment plant. Mombasa Cement Limited Vipingo factory is located in Kilifi County, Kikambala Division, Takaungu /Mavueni Location at Vipingo off Mombasa–Kilifi Road on two parcels of land namely MN/III/291/2 and MN/III/4391.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
Activity
Potential Environmental and Health Impacts
Proposed Mitigation measures
Release of sulphur gases SOx
·      Pollution of upper atmosphere that result in the formation of smog.
·      Inherent scrubbing, oxygen control (increase), fuel substitution (lower total sulfur), raw material substitution (lower sulfide sulfur), raw material alkali/sulfur balance, in-line raw mill, peheater upper stage hydrated lime injection, calcined feed recirculation, cement kiln dust internal scrubber, preheater upper stage trona injection and calcium-based internal scrubber.
 
·      Acid rain effect on plant, wildlife and property.
 
 
·      Precursor of fine particulate soot, which poses a significant health threat.
 
 
·      Respiratory illness, alterations in the lungs' defences and aggravation of existing cardiovascular disease.
 
NOx Emissions
·      Formation acid rain which may negatively plant and animal life.
·      Oxygen control (decrease), indirect firing, low-NOX burner, mid-kiln firing, process improvements, process control improvements, low-NOX calciner, staged combustion, semi-direct firing, mixing air fan and cement kiln dust insufflation.
 
·      Visibility impairment through formation of “ brown cities”.
 
 
·      Eutrophication  that is, explosive algae growth which can deplete oxygen in water bodies.
 
 
·      It contributes to global warming.
 
 
·      Respiratory illness in young children and harm lung function in people with existing respiratory illnesses.
 
 
·      Increased susceptibility to respiratory infection and alterations in the lung, nausea, irritated eyes and/or nose, fluid forming in lungs and shortness of breath.
 
CO emission and CO2 Emission
·      CO contributes to the formation of smog, ground-level ozone, which can trigger serious respiratory problems.
·      Good combustion practice, excess air (increase), raw material substitution, preprocessing system design and mixing air fan.
 
·      Greenhouse gas hence contribution to global warming.
·      improved thermal efficiency, Clinker substitution, improved electrical efficiency, raw material substitution and mineralizers.
 
·      Formation of acid rain potentially damaging to plants, animals and property.
 
 
·      Harmful health effects by reducing oxygen delivery to the body's organs (like the heart and brain) and tissues.
 
 
·      Central Nervous System Effects. 
 
Clinker and cement  dust pollution
·      Occupational illness (lung infection, itching skin, eye irritation, coughing, to workers and other people exposed to the cement dust;
·      Ensure de-dusting system is always efficient.
 
·      Reduced visibility.
·      workers to use appropriate PPE.
 
·      Chocking of plant.
·      Strict enforcement on PPE use.
 
 
·      Ventilation at workplace to be sufficient.
High noise level at the workplace 
·      Noise induced hearing loss.
·      Developing  and implementing an effective noise control and hearing conservation programme.
 
·      Poor concentration at the workplace.
·      Carrying out periodic noise measurements.
 
·      Reduced productivity.
·      Fitting noise machines with noise reduction devices.
 
 
·      Providing suitable hearing protection to all workers exposed to noise levels above 85dB(A).
 
 
·      Posting notices and signs in noisy areas.
 
 
·      Carrying out audiometric test by a designated medical practitioner to all workers exposed to noise levels above 85dB(A).
 
 
·      Educating all workers on importance of marking correct use of PPE provided to protect them against high noise levels.
Process solid waste management and disposal and Office waste management and disposal
·      Air pollution especially from kiln dust.
·      Recycle and reuse where applicable.
 
·      Skin irritation when in contact.
·      Segregate for appropriate disposal.
 
·      Water pollution.
·      Process improvement to minimize waste generations.
 
·      Production loss.
·      Material substitution to minimize waste generation.
 
·      Irritation of eyes.
·      Technological improvement to minimize waste generation.
 
·      Chocking of plants.
·      Absolute electronic equipment and other electronic waste to be returned to manufacturers for safe disposal.
 
·      Some electronic office waste such as used tonner cartridges and absolute office electronic equipment container hazardous substances.
 
Utilities operations wastewater
·      Water shortage due to high use
·      Adaption of water conservation opportunities.
 
·      Water contamination due to high dissolved solids and other contaminants.
·      Minimizing use of antifouling and corrosion inhibiting chemicals.
 
 
·      Testing for residual biocides and other pollutants of concern.
 
 
·      pH adjustment.
 
 
·      Sedimentation for suspended solids reduction using settling basins or clarifiers.
 
 
·      Multimedia filtration for reduction in non settleable suspended solids.
Sanitary Wastewater
·      Contamination of ground water.
·      Segregation of wastewater streams.
 
·      Odor.
·      Treatment to meet national standards for sanitary wastewater discharge.
Storm water
·      Degradation of the quality of water of the receiving water body.
·      Storm water should be separated from process and sanitary wastewater streams in order to reduce the volume of wastewater to be treated prior to discharge.
 
·      Contamination of soils.
·      Runoff from areas without potential sources of contamination should be minimized (e.g. by minimizing the area of impermeable surfaces) and the peak discharge rate should be reduced (e.g. by using vegetated swales and retention ponds).
 
·      Erosion.
·      Oil water separators and grease traps should be installed and maintained as appropriate at refueling facilities, workshops, parking areas, fuel storage and containment areas.
Dust
·      Lung infection.
·      Good housekeeping and maintenance.
 
·      Itching skin.
·      Use of air–conditioned, closed cabins.
 
·      Eye irritation.
·      Dust extraction and recycling systems.
 
·      Coughing, to workers and other people exposed to the cement dust.
·      Air ventilation (suction).
Heat
·      Physical burns of workers exposed to heat.
·      Shielding surfaces.
 
·      Burning and damage to process equipment.
·      Using personal protective equipment.
 
 
·      Minimizing the work time required in high temperature environments by implementing shorter shifts.
 
 
·      Use of air- or oxygen supplied respirators.
Noise and vibrations
·      Noise induced hearing loss.
·      Use of silencers for fans.
 
·      Poor concentration at workplace.
·      Room enclosures for mill operators.
 
·      Reduced productivity.
·      Noise barriers.
 
 
·      Personal hearing protection.
Radiation
§  Exposure to radiations.
§  Implementation of ionizing radiation protection measures.
Chemical hazards and other industrial hygiene issues
·      Physical burns.
·      PPE use.
 
·      Sickness/disease/ill health.
·      Appropriate handling as per material safety data sheets;
 
 
·      Training and sensitizations.
 
 
·      Medical examination of exposed workers.
Parking of lorries outside MCL premises 
·      Inconvenience to other motorists  and other road users.
·      Provide sufficient space for internal parking of lorries awaiting to deliver material or to collect material.
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8808079 National Environment Management Authority.
 


