
				Page: 2132GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  6590
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ON L.R. NO. 2358/2, IN MALAA AREA OF MACHAKOS COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Stima Investments Cooperative Society Limited, is proposing a Residential Development in Malaa Area of Machakos County.
The proposed project involves constructing residential houses in a gated housing scheme. The scheme  will  comprise  3-Bedroomed  Maisonettes,  3-bedroomed  bungalows  and  2  bedroomed
Apartment blocks, kindergarten area, commercial area.  In total there will 340 numbers of Residential housing units.  The total built area will be 28,544SQM. The  rest  of  the  area  will  be used for access roads, parking,  playground,  and waste  water treatment plant  and generator area. The estate will have a perimeter fence.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impact


Proposed Mitigation Measures 


Vegetation loss and disturbance


Clearance of vegetation should be done in necessary areas only.
Carry out environmental compensation where harm cannot be avoided by planting of indigenous plants during landscaping.


Soil Degradation


Use of gravel bags to trap sediment.
Rocked construction entrance and exit to keep sediment from being tracked onto adjacent roads and keep vehicles off bare soils.
Stock piles to be covered with tarpaulin.
Excavated soil to be used for back filling.
Top soil to be used for landscaping.
Limit the use of heavy machinery at the site & control earth works.


Water demand


Installation of toilet flushes with low volume cisterns.
Waste water recycling and rain water harvesting.
Abstract only permitted daily quantities from the borehole.


Air pollution


Spray water on dry rough roads during dry weather to suppress dust.
Cover loads of friable materials during transportation.
Control speed of construction vehicles and switch off machines when not in use.
Regularly service and maintain vehicles and mobile plants and machinery.
Provide PPE e.g. nose masks to workers.


Waste water


Provision of portable toilets for the workers or channel waste water into a conservancy tank if toilets will be built on site.
All waste water to be channeled to the sewer system.
Routine checkups and monitoring of the drainage system to avoid leakages and blockages.
Construction of separate storm water and waste water drain.


Noise & vibrations


Provide and enforce use of PPE during construction e.g. ear muffs.
Proper servicing of machinery and equipment (oiling, greasing etc).
Construction activities to be carried out between 8:00 a.m.– 5:00 p.m.
Monitor noise levels as per NEMA guidelines.


Occupational Health and Safety


Personnel to wear complete PPE.
Provision of firefighting equipment.
Put in place an emergency response plan.
Only qualified personnel to operate the machinery.
Designate a Health and Safety officer to be in-charge of enforcing site compliance with H&S rules and Regulations.
Provision of adequately stocked first aid kit and at least one trained first aider on site.
Adhere to OSHA, 2007 and rules under it.


Increase in solid wastes


Solid wastes to be put in a designated area for appropriate disposal.
Segregation of waste at source.
Limit quantity by developing appropriate budgets for purchase of raw materials to reduce wastage through exposure to weather elements.
Contract a duly licensed waste handler to transport waste.
Provision of skips for wet and dry waste to hold it before it is collected.


Population Increase


Planning of the development in such a way that there is adequate social and other infrastructure to meet needs of the tenants and their customers.


Dehydration of personnel


Provide safe and clean drinking water.


HIV/AIDS


Erection of billboards to sensitize locals on the need to practice safe sex to help in the fight against HIV/AIDS,
Conduct awareness campaigns on HIV/AIDS among the workers and the locals. This can be undertaken by the various NGOs and government agencies in the county.


Conflicts


Consultation with the host community and relevant stakeholders on the mitigation measures proposed for the negative impacts,
Where possible, offer women equal employment opportunities as men,
Communicate on project progress to the community members,


Decommissioning Phase


 


Expected Negative Impacts


Recommended Measures


Scraps material and other debris


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options.
Wastes generated as a result of facility decommissioning activities will characterized in compliance with standard waste management procedures.
The contractor will select disposal locations and the local council based on the properties of the particular waste generated.


 


All buildings, machinery, equipment, structures and partitions that will not be used for other purposes should be removed and reused or rather sold/given to scrap material dealers.
Where recycling/reuse of the machinery, equipment, structures and other waste materials is not possible the materials should be taken to approve dumpsites by a duly registered waste transporter.


Vegetation disturbance  land deformation: soil erosion, drainage problems


Implement an appropriate re-vegetation programme to restore the site to its original status.
During the re-vegetation period, appropriate surface water runoff controls will be taken to prevent surface erosion.
Monitoring and inspection of the area for indications of erosion will be conducted and appropriate measures taken to correct any occurrences.
Fencing and signs restricting access will be posted to minimize disturbance to newly-vegetated areas.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Machakos County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/8055148                  National Environment Management Authority.

