
				Page: 295GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  684
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MINING AND ORE PROCESSING PLANT FOR KILIMAPESA GOLD (PTY) LTD (ON NEW SITE), LOLGORIAN TRANSMARA SUB-COUNTY, NAROK COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Kilimapesa Gold (PTY) Limited propose to put a new production plant projected to mill 3000 tons of ore per month with 6000 tones new carbon in leach gold processing plant and a new tailing facility with an estimated footprint of more than 5Ha to contain a maximum of 500,000 tonnes tailing. The project site is located in Lolgorian, Transmara District 5 km West of Lolgorian Town, Narok County.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Phase


Activity


Physical impact


Mitigation


General Issues


Various activities


Energy consumption
Micro-climatical change
Abandoned equipments
Loss of cultural heritage
Effects on indigenous population
Loss of biodiversity
Energy conservation measures.
Environmental conservation measures.
Adequate dismantling and disposal of abandoned equipments.
Public consultations as well as awareness.
Consultation and accommodatin of views on conservation.

 

Exploration


Access road construction


Potential influx of population may lead to increased natural resource use
Soil erosion may be occasioned
Minimize where possible the stretch of the road to audit.
Minimize devegetation.

 

Line cutting


Removal of vegetation
Soil erosion
Possible habitat destruction
Minimize line width.
Revegetation where necessary.

 

Trenching and pitting
 
Drilling


Land scars
Danger to fauna, livestock
Noise and vibration (impact is dependent on proximity to settlements)
Land clearing for access to drillsites
Soil and water contamination by oil spills
Infill after sampling, mapping.
Revegetation.
Discussions with public to minimize nuisance.
Revegetation.
Good maintenance of machinery.
Recapping of bore-holes.

 

Mining


In general


Plant and mine noise
Blasting vibrations
Health and safety related to explosives handling
Loss of land
Solid waste
servicing of plant and Equipment controlled Blasting.
Adoption of stringent safet procedures.
Rehabilitation where possible.
Implement good disposal practices.

 

Underground workings


Land subsidence
Disposal of mine water
Seismic disturbances
Vegetation removal
Increased soil erosion
Increased sediment load in rivers
Infill with mine waste; revegetation.
Discharge into streams if water is of good quality.
Use water in processing.
Treatment of poor quality water prior to discharge.
Neutralization with lime; use of manmade wetlands (densely planted reed beds to neutralize acidity and precipitate metals) if small volumes are involved.
Seal workings

 

Ore
processing/plant operations


Waste rock and overburden disposal


Visual impact
Land alienation
Airborne dust
Erosion leading to increased sediment
loads
Landscaping and revegetation of dumps.
Use of waste as backfill in underground mines.
Spraying with water.
Rehabilitation to minimize visual abstruction.
Compaction, covering and revegetation

 

Benefiction operations chemical and physical separation


Emissions of HCN lead to air pollution.
Fallout can cause soil and water
contamination
Disposal of process wastes
Tailings dumps may cause visual
impact obstruction
Maintain optimum pH to avoid HCN evolution.
Dependent on type of emissions.
Reclamation of dumps.

 

Other plants tailings, the process wastes ar dealt wit separately)


Process water discharge can lead
to soil contamination and water
pollution
Use of hydrological resources
Hazardous chemicals handling and
disposal
Contamination of surface and
underground waters by cyanide
bearing solutions
Recovery of effluent for recycling as process water.
Treatment of process effluent solutions (e.g. cyanide destruction) prior to release into tailings dams.
Maximize use of recycled process water.
Chemicals handling, storage and disposal procedures should be enhanced
Design of closed circuit to recycle leaching solutions.
Treatment of waste solutions to ensure breakdown of cyanide

 

 


Tailings dams


Water pollution from seepage,
Windblown dust and atmospheric
pollution
Water logging of adjacent land
Tailing erosion
Tailing rupture - release of toxic
wastes (e.g. cyanide)
Poisoning of wildlife drinking
contaminated water
Land loss
Visual effect interference
Line tailings dam.
Seepage trenches construction.
Treatment of process waters prior to damming.
Collect and recycle water in seepage trenches.
Monitor water levels in adjacent land
Sound engineering design of TSF;
Continuous monitoring and verification of dam stability.
Prepare emergency plans.
Block access to tailings dam area.
Revegetation and rehabilitation in order to allow future use of land.
Landscaping and revegetation.

 

Construction
of camps &
site housing
facilities


Removal of vegetation removal of top soil trenching


Worker influx
Forest degradation
Water supply contamination
Destruction of fauna
Sewage problems
Construct necessary facilities.
Construction of septic tanks.
Construction of solid waste dump site.
Construction of an incinerator.

 

Decommissioning/post closure
activities


Closing and vacating the site


Subsidence
Waste dumps
Fauna and flora habitat loss and disturbance
Windborne dust
Decommissioning of roads.
Dismantling buildings.
Recontouring of waste dumps.
Water quality treatment.
Fencing dangerous areas.
Monitoring of seepage.

 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Narok County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8448893        National Environment Management Authority.

