
				Page: 1450Gazette Notice No. 4109
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MWANGEA IRRIGATION PROJECT IN GANZE, MAGARINI AND MALINDI SUB-COUNTIES, KILIFI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (National Irrigation Board) is proposing to put up an irrigation project in Ganze, Magarini and Malindi Sub-Counties of Kilifi County.
The Mwangea Irrigation Development Project will put an estimated 1500 ha of land into irrigated agriculture, which will lead to food security and make it possible for the local communities to draw economic benefits from the land and water resources available.
The proposed irrigation development project intends to abstract water from Galana/Sabaki River. Scour pipes, screens and intake chambers, in addition to other appurtenances will be provided during design of these structures.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


Loss of Biodiversity


Establishment of tree nurseries.
Planting and care of vegetation to restore the lost species.
Restoration of the lost biodiversity.


Soil Erosion and Siltation


Compaction of the loose soil.
Topsoil from quarries and burrow areasmust be rehabilitated.
Landscaping.
Slope stabilization.
Planting of grass and other vegetationto hold the soil firmly.
Building of gabions where severe effects are expected.
Provision of silt traps in drainagestructures.


Pollution


Sprinkling water during construction phase to avoid dust being blown bywind or construction vehicles.
Regular servicing of the machines andconstruction vehicles to avoid theemission of smoke and other gases. This will also reduce the intensity of thenoise being generated.
Proper collection and disposal of wasteoil and grease to avoid soil and water pollution.


Interference with Traffic
Flow


Proper and clearly visible road signsshould be erected.
Alternative routes to be established aswell as upgrading the gravel road to theintake.
Provide traffic wardens.
Servicing of vehicles and plant inproper garage and workshop.


Occupational Health and Safety


Comply with Kenyan safety policy andsafe working procedures, laws, regulation.
Appointment of Health, Safety (OSH)and Environment Officer.
Training of workers should be providedso as to acquaint them on the operationof the machinery and equipment toavoid danger to users.
The management should provide theworkers with safety instruction manualsand safety gear.
Provide footpaths and diversions asnecessary.
Enhance supervision of workers.
Install warning and directional signs tocontrol traffic.
Station traffic wardens on work sitesalong the roads and crossings.
Maintain roads in good state of repair.
Provision of health safety and welfareplans and procedures to workers on site.
Establishment of a clinic for emergency response plans.
Establish and monitor performance ofhealth and safety committee as per the safety regulations.
Develop a site safety action plandetailing safety equipment to be used, emergency procedures, restrictions onsite, frequency and personnelresponsible for safety inspections and controls.
All injuries that occur on site must berecorded in the accident register andcorrective actions for their preventionbe instigated as appropriate (Section 62of the Factories and Other Places of Work Act) emergency preparedness Programme should be established.


Insecurity


Setting up of an effective internalsecurity unit to work in liaison with thepolice and administration.
The construction camp should be wellsecured and patrolled at all times.
Provide fire prevention installations andalarm in the compound.


Interference with the flowof Galana River


Provision of sluice gates and spillwaysto ensure continuous flow is enhanced.


Soil Erosion and Siltation


Establishment of tree nurseries.
Silt traps should be put in place.
De-silting of the silt traps should bedone regularly.
Protection of steep cuttings should bedone by landscaping and to someextend building of gabions wherenecessary.
Terracing also should be done toreduce the velocity of water flow andhence reduced erosion.
Planting of vegetation like grass, treesand shrubs in the disfigured environment.
The catchment should be conserved byplanting of woodlands and otherrelevant flora.


Pollution from agrochemicals


Proper training on application ofagrochemicals.
Use of natural fertilizers.
Practicing organic farming.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413803               National Environment Management Authority.

