
				Page: 1452Gazette Notice No. 4329
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED SUGARCANE PLANTATION AND PROCESSING MILL FOR DOMINION FARMS LIMITED IN THE FLOOD PLAIN OF RIVER YALA IN SIAYA AND BONDO SUB-COUNTIES, SIAYA COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Dominion Farms Limited) is proposing to establish sugarcane plantation and put up a processing Mill in the 5,000 acres of land owned by the company within the Flood Plain of River Yala Siaya and Bondo Sub-Counties, County. The plantation will depend entirely on rain as a source of water. Therefore, no irrigation is required. The community members will be allowed to cultivate sugarcane in their own farms and sell them to DFL. Technical drawings for the proposed sugarcane processing mill show that it will have the following compartments;
(a) Sugarcane receiving section or yard
(b) Processing section having a sugarcane milling; a juice clarification; evaporation and boiling; and curing and cooling sections
(c) Packaging section
(d) Storage section with 6 No. silos
(e) Steam generation section having boilers
(f)  Power generation section with turbine set
An effluent treatment plant will also be constructed for the purpose of managing effluent from sugar processing. This will end up in an artificial wetland that will be established to finalize the process of wastewater purification.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental  and Social impacts


Mitigation measure


Soil management
 


Avoid cultivating land to a fine tilth.
Minimize tillage in preparation of the plant crop and the maintenance of ratoon crops.
Practice early fill-in of plant cane to allow soil to consolidate and reduce erosion.
Adopt a modified contour system in which rows are planted approximately on the contour, coupled with the use of contour banks and waterways.
Avoid sugarcane burning as a harvesting practice to improve total soil carbon stock.
Minimizing tillage and use of sugarcane residues as soil cover to minimize soil erosion and improve carbon stock.
Carry out soil sampling and testing to determine sugarcane crop nutrition requirements.


Biodiversity loss
 


Leave endemic and/or threatened species untouched and/or resettled within protected biodiversity zones and/or other suitably protected areas.
Advice and support to nearby farmers who may suffer from increased wildlife foraging on their fields.
Leave some areas uncleared as wildlife corridors.
Consider strategic re-vegetation in sensitive areas where the land had been previously cleared, particularly along river and stream banks.
Play an active role in the development and implementation of catchment protection programmes.


Water resource management
 


Adopt biological or other environment-friendly weed control practices.
Leave riparian buffer zones around sugarcane plantations with grass vegetation for trapping nutrients and suspended sediments.
Minimize environmental impacts from the use of artificial fertilizers by rotating the sugarcane crop with nitrogen fixing crops and non-crop plants like legumes.
On-farm drainage works must not drain water into adjacent designated wetlands.


Weed, pest and disease control
 


Use recommended pesticides, herbicides and other chemicals in the recommended quantities, mixture ratios, application intervals and application time.
Consider biological control of pests and an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) system.
Retain harvest residues from green cane harvesting as mulch and thus help reduce the number of weeds during the early establishment phase of ratoon crops.


Fire management
 


Adopt green cane harvesting and trash blanketing.
Make every effort to retain, incorporate or otherwise dispose of tops by using as animal feeds rather than burning them.
In case burning must be used for harvesting, it must be in accordance with the established permit system.


Agro-chemical usage
 


Calibrate the fertilizer applicator if available each time you change the product you are applying.
Where feasible, apply fertilizer below ground, either stool split or directly beside the sugarcane stool.
Use bio-solids treated sewage and effluent sludge as a source of nitrogen and organic matter.
Conduct soil tests and make record each time you apply chemicals.
Read and follow Material Safety Data Sheet in application of any agro-chemical.


Farm waste management
 


Do not use creeks as a dumping ground for farm rubbish, empty containers, obsolete equipment or as a wash-down area for machinery and equipment.
Remove the lids, triple rinse and puncture all used chemical containers and deliver to recycling or agents or specified council landfills.
Adopt commercial recycling options to remove tyres, batteries, scrap metal, waste oil and any other recyclable wastes from farms.
Where possible, purchase chemicals in a form that will reduce container waste or facilitate container recycling such as granular products or refillable containers.
Used chemical containers that require temporary storage prior to disposal should be triple rinsed, punctured and stored out of reach of flood waters.


Hazardous waste management such as oil spills from farm machinery and other chemicals
 


Attend approved chemical-handling accreditation courses and participate in refresher courses.
Store chemicals in a well-ventilated, secure and child-proof areas constructed of arc-mesh with impervious bounding.
Do not exceed the label rate of the chemical or pesticide.
Prior to spraying, notify neighbours who may be affected.
Carry out spraying operations under appropriate weather conditions.


Removal of vegetation, excavation and compaction and ground surface sealing
 


Demarcate the project area to be affected by the construction works to avoid spill-over effects.
Re-establish vegetation through implementation of a well-designed landscaping program me.
Provide inter-connected open drains as a measure to control movement of surface run-off.
Consider using porous pavements and/or spaced slabs on pavements to facilitate infiltration.
Install gutters to harvest rainwater from the roof of the buildings and water tanks to store the harvested water and thus reduce surface run-off.


Noise and vibration
 


Keep all generators and noisy equipment in sound-proof rooms or in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.
Avoid hooting of vehicles at the site and when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, schools and hospital.


Effluent, sewerage and wastewater and sanitary conveniences
 


Construct a septic tank and a soak pit at the site and install in-house flush toilets, bathrooms and sinks.
Regularly check all drainage pipes to fix leakages, remove blockages and prevent back-flooding.
Construct an effluent treatment plant for the sugarcane processing effluent and carry out laboratory analysis of effluent before it is released into the receiving environment to ensure that the standards according to EMCA, 1999 are not exceeded.


Solid wastes including excavated soil mill process wastes
 


Use excavated soil in filling of site and pot holes on access roads.
Install dustbins for temporary holding of solid wastes.
Separate solid wastes at the source into recyclable and non-recyclable.
Regularly collect and dispose wastes to avoid accumulation.
Use filter mud as manure.
Bagasse will be used as fuel for the boiler to produce steam for electricity production.
Give out bagasse to other companies that find it useful for making briquettes and plywood.


De-gradation of air quality
 


Properly maintain internal access roads to reduce fugitive dust.
Regularly service vehicles and machines to ensure that they are in good conditions and that they do not produce harmful exhausts.
Suppress dust by water spraying before sweeping and on dusty grounds.
Dispose waste regularly and appropriately to avoid wastes decomposing at collection areas.
Install multi-cyclones, wet collectors, bag filters and electrostatic precipitators to reduce particulate matter in boilers emissions.
Install air heaters and economizers in the boiler and lag it to retain heat and thus prevent release of hot air that is associated with harmful gases such as sulphur dioxide (SO2).

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413845               National Environment Management Authority.

