
				Page: 1451Gazette Notice No. 4110
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED DONGO KUNDU - MARIAKANI 400 KV ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION LINE IN KILIFI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Kenya Electricity Transmission Company) is proposing to construct approximately 50kms 400kV Electrical Transmission Line (TL) from Dongo Kundu to Mariakani in Kilifi County.The project shall comprise of a 400 kV double circuit (D/C) Quad Moose ACSR transmission line from Dongo Kundu to Mariakani.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
 

Aspect


Mitigation measures


Social disturbance, loss of property and livelihoods
 


Civic education, public awareness, and sensitisation on alternatives targeting where applicable both spouses.
Issuance of adequate notices.
Expedited compensation.


Aviation
 


The impact on air flight is assessed to be low to unsignificant at the moment. No airstrip within the vicinity of TL was noted. Furthermore the TL is far enough to affect landings and take offs at the Moi International Airport Mombasa.


Generation of solid wastes and effluent
 


Proper quantification of requirements to avoid redundancies of ordered materials.
Use of high quality, long lasting and well maintained electrical equipment materials.
Segregation of solid wastes to encourage recycling / reuse at the contractors camp, workshop and at the tower sites.
Monitor amount of waste generated per given period with a view of continuously reducing the waste generated.


Air quality
 


Provide appropriate PPEs to workers (dust masks and noise mufflers).
Deliver construction materials early in the morning when it is less windy and the materials are damp with dew.
Use low speeds while delivering materials.
In case of excessive dust, sprinkle materials and working areas with water.


Soil degradation
 


Plan construction to coincide with dry weather.
Minimise use of heavy equipment by favouring human labour.
Avoid dragging of construction material on the ground to deter creating of soil erosion channels.
In heavily compacted areas, such as lorry tracks, offloading sites and assembling points, disturb the soil, then mulch it to encourage quick plant regeneration.
Monitor soil erosion levels and compare with published data for need to undertake additional corrective measures.


Ground water resources
 


This impact is subtle to insignificant. Best engineering and construction practices can completely avoid this potential impact.
Uncontrolled discharge of effluents into the ground or groundwater aquifer must be avoided. Furthermore these risks could be managed by:
use of well-maintained vehicles and equipment,
implementation of an adequate effluent management, and
Suitableorganization of the construction site.
Due to the limited time of the construction activities and the character of the project, this impact is insignificant if mitigation measures are applied.


Loss of Vegetation (Trees, woodlands)
 


For the public land owners who will be affected, trees taller than 5 m will be compensated and hence the commercial value of the tree will be restored to the owners. The impact on ground cover will be restricted to the initial construction period, after which the ground cover is expected to be restored by alternative land use by the landowners.
Trees lost due to opening of access roads to the tower pads, to be compensates by planting of trees on roadsides other public places such as schools, or degraded sites, etc.
Adhere strictly to prescribed dimensions of 30m corridor in clearing of vegetation.
Monitor the biodiversity index over time in the project areas.


Visual intrusion
 


This is a permanent impact. However visual intrusion could be lessened by planting trees around the towers while keeping the 30m corridor clear.


Accidents and electrocution hazards
 


Adhere to stipulations of the OSHA 2007 during construction and operation.
Use well trained (including in first aid) properly supervised and adequately insured workers during construction.
Ensure use of PPEs during construction.
Ensure use of properly maintained equipment.
Use construction materials that meet stipulated standards.
Ensure all the construction is done to specification and it is duly certified
Mark the wires to international standards to warn low flying planes.
Create public awareness on dangers of OHL.
Fix appropriate danger signage on each pylon.
Deter scaling of the pylon by use of razor /barbed wire to ring-fence the pylon about 10 feet from the ground near schools and densely populated areas.
Supervise the way-leave at least once a year to maintain the way-leave devoid of any high vegetation.
Ensure workers adhere strictly to provided safety precautions when undertaking any repairs and maintenance activities.
Undertake regular drills on emergency preparedness in case of accidents.
Monitor cases of accidents and near misses.


Terrestrial fauna especially bird strikes
 


If noted during operation:
Erect perching platforms on top of pylons.
Mark some of the wires to make them more visible to birds.
Monitor number of electrocuted birds and those lost to collision and compare with published data to made decision on effectiveness of measures taken


Electromagnetic Field and corona effect
 


Evaluating potential exposure to the public against the reference levels developed by the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). Average and peak exposure levels should remain below the ICNIRP recommendation for General Public Exposure
Reassure the public through public seminars
Final detailed design should avoid densely populated areas and should be at least 200 m away from institutions that use sensitive electronic equipment such as health care facilities, and tertiary learning institutions.
For corona effect, it is recommended that the minimum recommended distance between conductors be observed in order to reduce the humming noise or the corona effect. In addition dumpers should also be installed on the conductors in order to reduce vibration and hence reduce corona effects


Increased cases of vandalism
 


Engage the public to report vandalism through use of manned hotlines.
Rapid response to deter any reported cases of impeding vandalism.
Consider use of advanced technology to deter vandalism by product modification or enhanced detection.
Lobby the Government to elevate the crime of vandalism of electrical installation to the level of economic sabotage.
Monitor number of attempted and accomplished vandalism.


Risk of fire outbreaks
 


Maintain the way-leaves free of fire fuel such as dry biomass .
Partner with other agencies such as Kwale and Mombasa County Governments in fire surveillance and fire fighting.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
K. D. BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413795               National Environment Management Authority.

