
				Page: 1449Gazette Notice No. 4108
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CEMENT GRINDING PLANT WITHIN KAPLALACH AREA, SOIN, KERICHO COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent Rai Cement Limited is proposing a Cement Grinding Plant within Kaplalach Area, Soin,  Kericho County.
The proposed development will involve the installation of one cement mill with the capacity to produce 2000 tonnes of cement from raw materials such as clinker, additives, gypsum and puzzolona. The technology to be used will be the most advanced in the market. The process will involve the following steps: Unloading of raw materials in the yard, Crushing of gypsum using gypsum crasher and storing it in the yard, Transporting of raw materials using belt conveyors to proportioning hoppers, Mixing of gypsum and other additives in a predetermined ration with clinker, Grinding of mixture of clinker, gypsum and additives to powder form in ball mill. The resultant mixture is called Portland cement, Storing of cement in cement silo, and Packing of cement in bags by automatic packing machines and Loading of cement into trucks/store by truck loading machine.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impacts


Proposed Mitigation Measures


Noise


Programme work to take minimum time.
Enforce workers discipline on site.
Use good, serviceable machinery.
Inform residents of impending work.
Observe discipline during operations.
Observe the provisions of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009.


Dust


Provide workers with dust mask and appropriate protective gear.
Moisten surfaces to be worked on.
Excavate only necessary area.


Surface runoff


Programme work to take shortest time.
Excavate only necessary area.


Decreased air quality due to dust emissions and C02


Apply latest dust arresters and equipment to curb emissions.
Study ways or reusing captured dust.
Use energy efficiently to reduce C02 emissions.


Soil erosion


Restrict excavation to required area.
Use as much soil as possible in backfilling operations.
Avoid working in rainy conditions Programme work to take least time.
Excavate only required area.


Debris deposition


Recover all debris and dispose properly.
Re-use any wastes as is applicable.
Recover all debris and replaced parts.
Re-use and recycle any materials as is appropriate.


Diminished landscape quality


Paint mast to blend with natural environment as possible.
Plant appropriate trees, flowers and shrubs if space allows.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kericho County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/741400                 National Environment Management Authority.

