
				Page: 2457GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6395
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED REMODELING OF SERVICES OF SERVICES STATIONS ON PLOT L.R NO. 1187/1 IN MTITO ANDEI MAKUENI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (National Oil) proposes to construct the following infrastructure:
Restaurant, Prayer room, Rainwater storage underground tank, Elevated water tank, Biodigestor, Convenience shop, Borehole, Shops, Bank space, Office block for service station Service bay, Wash bay, Tyre centre, LPG storage Compressor/Generator room and Lube store.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impacts


Mitigation Measures 


Geology and soils


All quarry sites shall be clearly indicated on the plan and approved by the local authority for use.
To prevent erosion all non-built up areas should be landscaped.


Decreased water quality
 


Ensure all spills from the construction plant are cleaned and treated before discharge.


Air quality


Develop and implement effective measures for minimization of dust, ensure the construction equipment is in good condition.


Increased fugitive dust emissions


Ensure that construction and demolition take into account the need to prevent and minimize release of fugitive.


Air pollution from incidents


Ensure the design, monitoring and safety systems installed for the facility comply with established industry standards practice. Implement, audit and regularly improve HSE measures for emergency response to air pollution incidents during the operation phase.


Pollution from waste generation


Develop and implement procedures for safe and appropriate disposal of waste for the all project phases.


Noise and vibration


Implement measures during the construction, operation and decommissioning phases to prevent and manage noise and vibration.


Increased employment opportunities


Implement where feasible measures to employ local.
Community members during both construction and operational phase.


Occupational health and safety related injuries


Develop, and implement measures to promote the health and safety of contractors and employees during construction and operational phases.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Makueni County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5748763              National Environment Management Authority.

