
				Page: 2456GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6204
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT IN KITENGELA, KAJIADO COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Alexander Forbes, Retirement Fund) is proposing a development comprising of 151No.massionettes in four courts covering 18.3 acres, 48 No. three-bedroom apartments and 12 No. two bedroom apartments in 2.5 acres, a shopping centre on 2.2 acres, community and utility facilities on 1.4 acres and an undeveloped riparian zone of 2.4 acres. In total the built up areas will take up about 50,000 m2 of land. The entire development will be secured by a perimeter wall.
 The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Vegetation loss due to clearance of site
 


The clearance of the site for construction purposes should be kept to a minimum.
Instruct all construction workers to restrict clearing to the marked areas and not to work outside defined work areas.
Rehabilitate all disturbed areas by planting vegetation cover and reforestation especially along the River Kisaju riparian zone.


Open trenches hazardous to individuals
 


Backfilling temporary trenches as soon as their need are no longer required
Warning signs at both deep and shallow trenches especially at the shopping centre construction site that may require deep excavations.


Soil, water and groundwater contamination
 


Construct oil and water interceptors to capture discharge of oils, fuels and other polluting liquids at the workshop.
Ensure proper handling of lubricants, fuels and  solvents while maintaining the equipments.
Surface runoff to be controlled by provision of retention areas.
A safety and emergency response plan to be developed for all operations with emphasis on the protection of the environment.


Solid waste generation which pollutes the environment may cause water borne diseases
 


Bins should be strategically placed within the construction site. They should also be covered to prevent access by vermin and minimize odours.
The bins at both the campsite and construction site should be emptied regularly to prevent overfilling.
Use of cleaner technologies / generation to minimize on generation of solid wastes.
A waste management plan to be developed to handle temporary storage, transport and disposal of all kinds of waste.
Solid waste should be recycled, reused and utilized in an environmentally acceptable manner where possible.
Use a registered waste handling contractor to manage solid waste at the site.


Gaseous emissions which pollutes air causing respiratory problems (SO, CO, NO)
 


Maintaining machines at manufacturers specifications.
Site roads should be dampened within reasonable time to prevent dust nuisance.
Cover or wet construction materials such as sand to prevent dust nuisance. Also minimize cleared areas to those that are needed for construction.


Liquid waste generation resulting into
Soil and water contamination
 


Construct a water treatment system and direct all black water into the system
Use grey water for landscaping and gardening.
Do not discharge water into River Kisaju at all times.


Traffic disruption and inconveniences
 


Traffic management plan to provide for safe and efficient movement of traffic into and out of the structure.
Provide acceleration and deceleration lanes.
Strict adherence to traffic code of conduct and the traffic police should ensure compliance.
Erect appropriate warning signs on approaches to the site access.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/57486620            National Environment Management Authority.

