
				Page: 2458GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6396
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL STATION DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT L.R.NO. 631/1183, KERICHO MUNICIPALITY, KERICHO COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Shajanand Hardwares Limited) is proposing to develop a Petrol Station on Plot L.R.No. 631/1183, Kericho Municipality, Kericho County
The project will comprise of; Five pump isles (two for super, two for diesel and one for kerosene),  Three underground steel petroleum storage tanks (USTs), A heavy duty covered man hole for each of the UPSTs, Service bay,  Car wash bay,  Compressor room, Generator room, Lubricant Mart, Oil receptor tank, Store, Changing rooms, Storm Water Drains, Canopy over pumps, Station shop, stores and offices, Air and water point, Sanitary facilities, a conservancy tank, Associated piping and wiring work, Parking bay, a four storey commercial block, with basement and a four storey residential block .
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Proposed  Mitigation Measure


Solid waste
 


Reuse of construction debris will be encouraged.
Separate waste appropriately to recover re-usable prior to disposal.
A licensed private contractor will be engaged to appropriately dispose off all the solid waste that shall not have been reused on completion of the work.
Train workers on risk associated to inhalation of dust and appoint at least one person to ensure proper dressing and waste handling by the workers.
Provide workers with appropriate protective gears including nose and mouth masks.
Appropriate bill of quantity will be prepared to minimize left over.
Reduce the amount of waste generated by accurate budgeting to cut off on excesses that may expire before use.
Separate waste appropriately to recover re-usable prior to disposal.
Ensure bins are erected appropriately, labeled and regularly being emptied and cleaned.
Engage a licensed private contractor to appropriately dispose off on a regular basis the anticipated solid waste.


soil erosion
 


Stage site clearance works so as to minimize the area of exposed soil at any given time.
Re-cover exposed soils with grass and other ground cover as soon as possible.
Temporarily bund exposed soil and redirect flows from heavy runoff areas that threaten to erode or result in substantial turbid surface runoff to adjacent drainage waters.
Monitor areas of exposed soil during periods of heavy rainfall throughout the construction phase of the project to ensure that any incidents of erosion are quickly controlled.
Leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Building of physical barriers to prevent mass movement where necessary.
The immediate surrounding area should be kept as clean as possible to enhance monitoring.
Avoid soil extractions during rainy periods.


waste management
 


A site waste management plan should be prepared by the contractor prior to commencement of building. This should include designation of appropriate waste storage areas, collection and removal schedule, identification of approved disposal site, and a system for supervision and monitoring.
Preparation and implementation of the plan must be made the responsibility of the building contractor with the system being monitored independently.
Special attention should be given to minimizing and reducing the quantities of solid waste produced during site preparation and construction.
Any vegetation and combustible waste must not be burned on the site.
Reusable inorganic waste (e.g. excavated sand/soils) should be stockpiled away from drainage features and used for in filling where necessary and/or possible.
Unusable construction waste, such as damaged pipes, formwork and other construction material, must be disposed of at an approved dumpsite. Chemical waste should be handled as per their Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) requirements.


Noise pollution


Appropriate dressing of workers which will include: ear muffs / plugs.
Maintain excavation equipment in accordance to manufactures specifications to ensure efficient operation.
Noise and vibration will be kept at acceptable levels and construction/Excavation activities confined to normal working hours.
Compliance to the environmental management and coordination (noise and excessive vibrations pollutions control) Regulations, 2009. Legal notice No. 61, 2009.
Workers exposed to excessive noise and vibration –drivers of excavator - should work in shifts with frequent breaks to minimize long hours of exposure.
Excavation activities to be limited between 8 a.m & 6 p.m.
Use of appropriate cushioning for heavy equipment.


Air Pollution
 


Dampen work areas materials heaps and mulch bare ground to minimize dust emission.
Maintain low speed in the rural access routes during transportation activities.
Maintain equipment and machinery to manufacturer’s specifications.
Minimize period of machinery idling.
Provide appropriate personal protective equipment to site workers.


Soil Aeration


Soil should be loosened up using ploughing techniques.
Soil with cement or other construction contaminants should be treated appropriately to enable growth capacity.


Loss of terrestrial habitat &biodiversity–Re-vegetation
 


Protecting the existing individual vegetation as much as possible; and
Set a replanting and landscaping programme that focuses on increasing “green area”.
The proponent will ensure proper demarcation of the project area to be affected by the construction works. This will be aimed at ensuring that any disturbance to flora is restricted to the actual project area and avoid spillover effects on the neighbouring areas.
In the same vein, there will be strict control of construction vehicles to ensure that they operate only within the area to be disturbed by access routes and other works.
Advice from relevant departments will be sought before clearing any major tree species if need arises.


Liquid Waste
 


Connect to KEWASCO sewer line.
Advise tenants to install mini bins in rooms and advice patrons to only use soft tissue in toilets to avoid blockage of sewer line.
Prompt unblocking and repair of stalled sewer lines.
Channel storm water appropriately to avoid mixing and outburst of sewer.


Energy Loss
 


Install an energy-efficient lighting system in the building.
Maximize on use of natural light during the day.
Switch off all light and equipment when not in use.
Use energy efficient cooking stoves and gargets to conserve energy.
Purchase essential items in bulk to cut on the number of trips to stockers.


Water Loss
 


Install water-conserving automatic taps, shower heads and toilets.
Harvest rainwater from roof in an elevated tanks.
Store adequate amount of water from the municipal supply.
Promptly fix damaged/leaking pipes, faulty taps and associated facility within the building.
Sensitize workers and patrons on need for efficient utilization of scarce water resources.


Fire Hazard and Insecurity
 


Install firefighting equipment at convenient locations within the premise.
Train employees on precautionary measures to avoid fire accidents.
Fix damaged electrical systems and gargets promptly.
Proper supervision should be ensured to avoid open fire.
Fire disaster evacuation plan posters to be developed and posted appropriately.
Provide for first aid facilities as per the OSHA.
Ensure that the site is always guarded by a reputable security firm.
Constant site patrol.
Collaboration with existing security machinery.
Partnership with neighbours and police in community policing.


Oil spills and leakages
 


The potential contaminant source areas such as forecourt, pump islands, parking areas will be properly paved to contain oil spills from impacting the environment.
The construction of the forecourt and parking areas will be done using reinforced concrete to avoid seepage of any fugitive petroleum spills into the soil system as well as draining the generated surface run-off into the oil/water interceptor.


Electrical Safety
 


An emergency power control switch will be strategically installed in order to facilitate general power cut of the entire service station in case of emergency.
An adequately stocked “First Aid Box” will be provided and the service station employees will be properly trained on how to administer first aid.


Timber scaffolding and form support – forest depletion
 


The use of local timber should be kept to a minimum with such sources being approved by the relevant authorities such as Kenya Wildlife Service and the Forestry Service.
Steel scaffolding should be used in preference to timber and the Contractor should ensure that sufficient quantities of scaffolding are available for hire at the time of construction.


Materials stockpiling and  storage
 


The stockpiling of construction materials should be properly controlled and managed. Fine-grained materials (sand, marl, etc.) should be stockpiled away from any surface drainage channels and features.
Low perimeter berms should be placed around the piles of sand and marl and/or tarpaulin used to cover open piles of these materials to prevent them from being washed away during rainfall.
Safe storage areas should be identified and retaining structures put in place prior to the arrival and placement of material to limit fugitive dust.
Materials to be delivered on site in installments.


Occupation Accidents
 


Ensure warning signs on road safety are erected at appropriate location during excavation and transportation.
Speed limit of transport vehicle to be kept low.
Personnel training on workforce safety
Control access to working sites- Secure the work area.
Plan stabilization and evacuation of the injured.
Liaise with the district Occupation Health and Safety department to provide for appropriate induction training and regular updating of workers skills on occupational health and Safety matters.
Provide for appropriate signage and warnings at work site.
Use personal protective equipment (PPE) to workers and any visitors.
Provide for first aid facilities as per the OSHA.
Provide and clearly display emergency contacts.
Develop and implement a detailed and site specific emergency response plans.
Firefighting emergency response plan to be prepared.
Ensure availability of a loaded firefighting equipment.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kericho County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5748697              National Environment Management Authority.

