
				Page: 2455GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6203
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED SEWERAGE EXPANSION AND REHABILITATION PROJECT FOR KERICHO TOWN IN KERICHO COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Lake Victoria South Water Services Board (LVSWSB)) is proposing Expand and Rehabilitate the Kericho Town sewerage system. Kericho Town is located in Kericho County, Rift Valley in Kenya on the National trunk road (B1) that connects Nakuru, Kisii and Kisumu
The proposed sewer expansion will involve rehabilitation of the existing treatment works
and the expansions will pass through, KIE, Satellite motobo, Swahili, Midwest, CBD, Site Service and Nyagacho area all located within Kericho municipality
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Air pollution and foul smell


Inform the Majengo, Site and Service Estates prior to start of work.
Flushing of all sewer/ waste water within a sewer line before exposing it in the open during the rehabilitation activities (replacing of pipes).
Minimizing the number of motorized vehicles on use.
Wet all active construction areas and  when necessary to lay off dust.
Provide nose masks to workers to protect them from dust emissions and other toxic gaseous materials.
For the long term air pollution impact of the sewer treatment plant, the LVSWSB should ensure that the current site is relocated at the later phases of the project, due to the proximity to the Kericho Sub-County Hospital.


Noise pollution


Avoid night time construction when noise is loudest.
Conduct periodic noise measuring and monitoring to determine levels and extent of harmful noise.
Clearly label the high noise areas.
Provide PPE (hearing protection) to persons operating within or visit identified high noise areas.
In order to meet noise level requirements, the equipments should be equipped with standard noise attenuation features. Machines that exceed acceptable noise limits should be equipped with silencers or lagging materials or specially designed acoustic  enclosures.
Inform local residents when construction activities are likely to generate excessive noise in order to minimize disruption to local residents.
Sensitize truck drivers to switch off engines while offloading materials; to avoid gunning vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, residential areas and hospitals (Kericho District Hospital neighbouring the treatment plant).


Drainage and hydrology


Excavated channels to follow contours to avoid interference with surface drains.
Whenever necessary, drains along the construction line are directed towards existing drainage systems to cater for storm water during the rains. However, construction should be carried out during a dry season and should take the shortest period possible.
Utilise excavated soil to level excavated ground where necessary and cover the sewer lines that will have been laid in the ground.
Construction materials and other debris (lime, cement and fresh concrete.) should be handled carefully to prevent them from finding their way into the nearby water sources such as Dionyoset River (Buffalo River).
Ensure compliance with environmental laws.


Interference with physical setting


The structures to be developed should be aesthetically acceptable to blend in with the surrounding.
The proponent shall as much as possible complete the works in such a way that natural aesthetics shall be retained at the locations. Restoration shall be undertaken to ensure that the original setting is as much as possible retained.


Solid waste management


A site waste management plan should be prepared by the contractor prior to commencement of construction works. This should include designation of appropriate waste storage areas, collection and removal schedule and identification of approved disposal site.
Unusable construction waste, such as damaged pipes, formwork and other construction material, must be disposed off at an approved dumpsite.
Proper solid waste receptacles and storage containers should be provided, particularly for the disposal of lunch and drink boxes so as to prevent littering of the site.
Arrangements should be made for the regular collection of litter and for its disposal with the County Government of Kericho.
Ensure that the solid waste collection, segregation, and disposal system is functioning properly at all times during the construction phase.
Recycle and re-use wastes where possible such as scraps metal.


Vegetation clearing, soil erosion and sedimentation


Re-plant the indigenous vegetation as much as practical once work is completed.
Limit vegetation clearance unless where unavoidable circumstances appear.
Contain excavated soils so that they will not find their way into nearby water sources.
Cement mixing should be done in a designated area away at a safe distance from storm water drains.
Spilled cement or concrete should be collected and disposed away from natural water ways or storm water drainage.
Sensitise workers and enable them to properly handle concrete spillages or waste cement.
Re-vegetation of exposed areas around the site should be carried out rapidly in order to mitigate against erosion of soil through surface water runoff and wind erosion.


Occupational health and safety concerns


Ensure that all construction machines and equipment are in good working conditions to prevent occupational hazards.
Establish a Health and Safety Plan (HASP) for both civil and Electromechanical work.
Appoint a trained health and safety team for the duration of the construction work.
Use of dust masks while working in dusty environment
Provide workers with gloves, ear gears, sturdy rubber boots and overalls to protect their skin from  the effects of cement;
Provide workers training on safety procedures and emergency response such as fire, oil and chemical spills, pipe bursts and other serious water loss risks.
Develop a plan on how to handle the raw sewage during the construction phase.


Risks of overflowing manholes due to blockage of sewers


Regular inspection of the system to ensure performance is maintained at high levels;
Blockages should be detected and promptly replaced; Regular monitoring and sampling of the waste water at influent and effluent points as well as in the receiving water bodies
Communities living within the river basins where the trunk sewers will be constructed should be enlightened on dangers of using raw sewerage to irrigate farmlands.


Noise and vibration


Ensure scheduled demolition timing is observed;
Contractor to give timely prior information to stakeholders and neighbouring institutions such as the Kericho District (County) Hospital of the schedule.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kericho County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5748807              National Environment Management Authority.

