
				Page: 2460GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6397
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED SUPPORT TO AND EXPANSION OF MALINDI BIO FUEL CLUSTER-JATROPHA FARMING PROJECT
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Comitato Internazionale Per Lo Sviluppo Dei Popoli) is proposing to expand the Malindi Bio Fuel Cluster-Jatropha farming Project in Mida Sub-location in Gede Location, Mijomboni Sub-location in Gede Location, Kakuyuni Sub-location in Goshi Location and Marikebuni Sub-Location in Magarini Location (the first three clusters are in Malindi District while the latter is in Magarini District) in Malindi and Magarini Sub-.
The project entails the establishment of Jatropha curcas as a hedge by 1200 farmers organizing them in SHG found in four clusters in Mida, Mijomboni, Kakuyuni and Markebuni areas of North Constituency, Kilifi County. Although the core business of the proponent will be to skill the local farmers establishing Jatropha Plants as a live fence around their farms and later harvest the seeds for oil production, and briquette from biomass, the growing of other food crops will continue on the same piece of land un-interfered, all these will take place without destruction of the native vegetation
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Impact on biodiversity along the farm boundaries


Site specific preparation for Jatropha planting.
Selected farms should have few trees along their boundaries to avoid any felling down of indigenous trees.
Farmers to use existing fallow areas to plant Jatropha.


Invasiveness


Close monitoring of the plant growth throughout its life cycle by researchers.
Transportation of seeds in closed bins.
Remove and burn Jatropha plants and seeds.


Host to diseases


Remove all infected cassava or other host plants from within and around sites to be used for new plantings.
Use virus-free stem cuttings for all new plantings.
Encourage farmers to get materials available on the farms and KARI Msabaha station.
Remove diseased plants from within crop stands (rouging) Continuous research work.


Health hazards to man


Clearly label jatropha products as “Not fit for human consumption”.
Sensitization of farmers on the dangers of the plant.
Research work on how to overcome the hazards.
Farmers advised to take care of their children’s safety.


Health hazards to livestock


Farmers to be advised not to use JSC as animal feed.
Awareness creation.
Natural mitigation- jatropha is hardly fed on by animals.


Solid waste management


Take un-reusable plastic bags to a recycling plant.
Make eco-charcoal from JSC waste.
Make compost from other organic wastes.
Reuse plastic bags.


Demoralization of farmers


Education and awareness.


Resentment from people


Education and awareness.
JGA constitution to allow inclusiveness.


Conflicts within JGA


Constitution to be adhered to strictly.
Proponent to monitor Association’s activities.
Project stakeholders to mediate and reconcile group members.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5748779              National Environment Management Authority.
 
 
 
 

