
				Page: 298GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 808
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED ISINYA - NAIROBI EAST 400 KV TRANSMISSION LINE AND ACCOMPANYING SUBSTATIONS IN KAJIADO AND MACHAKOS COUNTIES
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Kenya Electricity Transmission Company –KETRACO) is proposing to set up a 400 KV Double Transmission Line and accompanying Substations in Kajiado and Machakos Counties.
The proposed development comprises the construction of 75km of 400kV double circuit transmission line from Isinya to Nairobi East substations. The proposed line will starts at Isinya Substation (0258706, 9804081) in Kajiado County, off Namanga Road. It will run northeastwards through Kaputie plains passing through Enkirigirri area where it will make a turnoff at INE1 (0264180, 9806580). At INE1, the proposed line will turn further northwards across the expansive plains at Olturoto area. The line will maintain the same direction across the Kaputie plains up to and beyond the boundary between Kajiado and Machakos Counties. After the plains the line will cross Mombasa road at Mathatani area near Lukenya Hills where angle point INE2 (0286830, 9835250) is located.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Vegetation damage, habitat loss, and loss of food source for wildlife and invasion by exotic species along the ROW and access Roads


Utilize appropriate clearing techniques (e.g. Hand clearing. as opposed to mechanized clearing) by using human. labour as opposed to heavy machinery hence limiting vegetation clearing, along the construction corridor.
Maintain native ground cover and low growing vegetation beneath along the ROW by selective removal of tall growing tree species and allowing low-lying grasses and shrubs in transmission line rights-of-way.
Minimize clearing and disruption to riparian vegetation.
Use of discontinuous maintenance roads to reduce access to wildlands and encroachment.
Do not burn cleared vegetation in the area to avoid starting a fire in the savannah landscape.
Loosen compacted soil to allow re-growth of vegetation.



Soil erosion, water siltation and contamination


Soils excavated for the construction of the towers shall be used for backfilling
Soils shall not be left exposed to wind/water for long.
Riverine vegetation shall be minimally disturbed during the construction.
Employ soil erosion control measures and safeguard stream / river banks.
Use well-maintained vehicles and machinery to prevent soil contamination by fuel and oil spill.
Apply appropriate procedures to clean-up fuel and oil spills.
Utilize existing roads and village tracks as far as possible.
Minimize number on new access roads
Limit extent of construction, camp sites and storage areas to as less space as possible.
Prohibit idle driving in the landscape
Where applicable, restore exposed soil with native vegetation.


Impact on surface and groundwater


Towers should be constructed away from dams, wells, and stream / river channels.
A riparian distance of approx. 5m meters away from the
River edge to be maintained to avoid pollution and enhance safety.
Prepare temporary catch basins / sediment traps during the rainy season.
Implement appropriate effluent, fuel and oil handling procedures.
Store materials (e.g. cement), liquids and lubricants in closed / sealed containers to avoid leakage.
Provide temporary sewer system for project staff.
Regularly maintain project vehicles and machinery.
Maintain vehicles and machinery in licensed garages, where applicable.
Re-fuel construction equipment on sealed surfaces, in enclosed areas.
Dispose off all waste generated e.g. fuel, oil and lubricants in designated areas.


Visual intrusion of landscape


The selected route traverses an area with low human population which minimizes the perception of landscape intrusion.
Use camouflaged structures and non-reflecting conductors in areas where visibility is not required.
Locate TL away from wilderness view points and tourism lodges.


Air Pollution (dust nd smoke emissions)


Control speed of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Spray water during the construction phase on excavated areas to reduce dust emission.
Regular maintenance of plant and equipment.
Provide dust masks for use while working- in dusty conditions.
Use serviceable vehicles and machinery to avoid excessive smoke emission.
Optimize transport management to avoid needless truck trips.
Prohibit burning of rubbish on site.


Noise pollution


Schedule noisy construction to day time
Inform local people in advance about the likelihood of noise pollution from construction activities.
Employ noise reduction measures by using well-maintained vehicles and machinery.
Use noise reduction/hearing protection devices when working with noisy equipment.
Use serviceable equipment with low noise emission.
Instruct truck and machine operators to avoid engine raving.


Rock Blasting


Use of appropriate rock blasting technology.
Get approval from the Department of Mines and Geology to carry out rock blasting.
Inform the neighboring communities and organizations through notices on the intended or ongoing rock blasting exercises so they are not caught by surprise.


Generation of Solid Waste


Provide solid waste collection facility for the temporary storage of waste prior to disposal at an appropriate and designated location.
Train project staff on procedures of appropriate solid waste disposal so that no domestic waste is disposed of at the project area.
The storage yards should be provided with solid waste disposal facilities such as waste bins/chutes.
Liaise with the local authorities on suitable dumping sites
Preferably excavate during the dry season to avoid soil erosion and siltation of river/steams.
Use of the soil to backfill.


Risk of fire


Monitor the ROW vegetation that is more susceptible to fire.
No burning of any materials wherever should be permitted at the site.


Physical Body Hazards


Appropriate head, hand and foot protection (PPE) during the manual clearing of vegetation.
Adopting ergonomic work flow designs that fit physical tasks to employees and not vice versa while maintaining a balance with productivity.


Loss of land use, population relocation, Land acquisition and Resettlement


Provide appropriate relocation options to displaced persons.
Ensure displaced persons are informed about their options and rights pertaining to resettlement; offered choices and provided with alternatives.
Provide prompt compensation at full replacement cost for losses of assets attributable directly to the project; offer support after displacement, for a transition period, based on a reasonable estimate of the time likely/to be needed to restore their livelihood and standards of living provide development assistance in addition to compensation measures.


Temporary risk to road safety along the Roads


Pre-notification on the intension to move large equipment by road observe strict code of conduct by the transported.
Electrical Materials to be transported while covered to keep away moisture.


Working at heights


Use construction site barrier tapes to isolate the working area to bar access to the area in case of a dropping object.
Test structures for integrity prior to undertaking work.
Implement a fall protection program including training in climbing techniques and use of harnesses.
Inspection, maintenance, and replacement of fall protection equipment
Use helmets and other PPE to mitigate against scratches, bruises; lacerations and head injuries from dropping objects,
Provide first aid facilities at the site.


Loss of Farm Land and crops


Verify land tenure.
Discuss with the resident/owner.
Develop a resettlement plan.
Create awareness on land alternatives /resettlement options.



Relocation of homesteads


Verify land tenure.
Discuss with the resident/owner the various options and alternatives.
Develop a resettlement plan.
Conduct resettlement.
Monitor resettled persons.
Alternative land for relocation to be identified.
Compute the Actual no of person to resettled.
Reports on resettled persons.


Community misconceptions


Awareness creation amongst the community on the project facts.
Community issues responded to.
Project progress reports and monitoring reports to be prepared and recommendations implemented.
Hold a minimum of two meetings per division.


Increase in social vices


Conduct Information Education and Communication (IEC) amongst the community and the project staff.
Provide condoms at village and project level.


Habitat loss and invasion by exotic species along the ROW and access Roads


Utilize appropriate clearing techniques (e.g. Hand clearing as opposed to mechanized clearing) by using human labour as opposed to heavy machinery.
Ground vegetation, such as grass, should be spared in order to prevent soil erosion.
Trees and shrubs shorter than 4 m should be permitted unless they are hindering maintenance activities.
Minimizing clearing and disruption to riparian vegetation.
Replant disturbed sites with native plant species.
Manage ROW to Maximize wildlife benefits.
Do not burn cleared vegetation in the area to avoid starting a fire in the savannah landscape.


Electrocution from Live Power Lines


Ensure physical integrity of structures is maintained.
Deactivate and ground live power distribution lines before.
work is performed on, or in close proximity, to the lines.
Ensuring live-wire work is done by trained worker only.
Ensure the workers are properly isolated and insulated from any conductive object (live-line work).


Aircraft navigation safety


The transmission line route selected shall be located at a safe and acceptable distance from any airstrip or aircraft flight path.
Conductors fitted with brightly coloured 'aviation' balls, luminescent and shiny devices in the section near the airstrip
Obtain KCAA approval for tower heights.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
(d) County Director of Environment, Machakos County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6742401           National Environment Management Authority.

