
				Page: 297GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 807
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED 400 KV DOUBLE CIRCUIT LINE: LAMU-NAIROBI EAST TRAVERSING FIVE COUNTIES OF LAMU, TANA RIVER, GARISSA, KITUI AND MACHAKOS
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Electricity Transmission Company –KETRACO) is proposing to set up a 400 Kv Double Circuit line traversing five Counties of Lamu, Tana River, Garisa, Kitui and Machakos.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Clearing of vegetation and loss of biodiversity


Compensate by planting of trees on roadsides and avenues and in other public places such as schools.
Undertake selective clearance to target only tall trees and shrubs and avoid clearance of short annual herbs.
Adhere strictly to prescribed dimensions in clearing of vegetation.
Monitor the biodiversity index over time in the project areas.


Hazard to fauna including bird strikes


Desist from any form of hunting of game for trophies or food.
Cart away any waste.
Mark some of the wires to make them more.
Erect perching platforms on top of pylons.
Monitor number of electrocuted birds and those lost to collision and compare with published data to made decision on effectiveness of measures taken.


Noise and dust pollution


Obtain necessary authorization if blasting is to take place.
Provide appropriate PPEs to workers (dust masks and noise mufflers).
Organize deliveries to avoid constant noise irritation and train workers on good practices of minimizing noise generation such as: turning off idle machines, avoiding hooting, gentle off-loading, use of properly maintained machines, and installation of mufflers on machinery.
Next to settlements, restrict construction to daytime.
Exercise discipline in areas next to schools and clinic .
Deliver construction materials early in the morning when it is less windy and the materials are damp with dew.
Use low speeds while delivering materials.
In case of excessive dust, sprinkle materials and working areas with water.
Supervise workers to ensure they work away from drifting dust.


Impeded drainage leading to soil erosion into water resources


Plan construction to coincide with dry weather.
Minimize use of heavy equipment by favouring human labour.
Avoid dragging of construction material on the ground to deter creating of soil erosion channels.
In heavily compacted areas, such as lorry tracks, offloading sites and assembling points, disturb the soil, then mulch it to encourage quick plant regeneration.
Cut back the vegetation rather than outright clearance such that the soil is held by the stumps.
Do not disturb river banks whatsoever.
Use properly serviced equipment and take particular caution when working next to a river.
Limit soil erosion (see preceding section).
Sensitize workers not to dump any waste into rivers.
Monitor soil erosion levels and compare with published data for need to undertake additional corrective measures.


Wetlands


Design OHTL route to cross wetland perpendicularly to minimize impact.
Adhere strictly to prescribed dimensions in clearing of vegetation.
Clean construction equipment after working in areas infested by invasive species.
Place markers on the top (shield) wire to make the lines more visible to birds if the collision potential is high.
Monitor the biodiversity index over time in the project areas.


Solid waste generation


Proper quantification of requirements to avoid redundancies of ordered materials
Use of high quality, long lasting and well maintained electrical equipment materials.
Segregation of solid wastes to encourage recycling / reuse at substations.
Monitor amount of waste generated per given period with a view of continuously reducing the waste generated.


Hazardous material and fuel spills


Spill prevention.
Emergency response.
Clean up and contaminated soil remediation.


Electric and magnetic fields (EMF)


Installation of transmission lines to avoid residential properties or other locations intended for highly frequent human occupancy, (e.g. schools or hospitals).
Taller double circuit poles resulting in less of a magnetic field at ground level.


Visual intrusion


Create public awareness before construction of pylons.
Where feasible use the hilly terrain to locate pylons in a way that will mask the visual intrusion.


Land acquisition and disruption of social economic setup


Implement a resettlement assessment plan.
Civic education, public awareness, and sensitization on alternatives targeting where applicable both spouses.
Issuance of adequate notices.
Expedited compensation.


Interference with cultural setup


Raise public awareness on the values of culture.
Support social activities that promote the local cultures through the CSR avenues.


Interference with cultural heritage


Determine  and protect sites through a professional study as stipulated in The National Museums and Heritage Act of 2006, section 5.


Occupational safety and health concerns, including electrocution


Adhere to stipulations of the OSHA 2007 during construction and operation.
Use well trained (including in first aid) properly supervised and adequately insured workers during construction.
Ensure use of PPEs during construction.
Ensure use of properly maintained equipment.
Use construction materials that meet stipulated standards.
Ensure all the construction is done to specification and it is duly certified.
Take special caution on building of bases to ensure the pylons are properly anchored on the ground by approving each base individually by competent structural engineer .
Create public awareness on dangers of OHTL.
Fix appropriate danger signage on each pylon and deter scaling of the pylon by use of razor /barbed wire to ring-fence the pylon about 10 feet from the ground.
Supervise the way-leave at least once a year to maintain the way-leave devoid of any high vegetation.
Ensure workers adhere strictly to provided safety precautions when undertaking any repairs and maintenance activities.
Undertake drills on emergency preparedness in case of accidents.
Monitor cases of accidents and near misses.


Risk to low flying planes


Mark the wires to international standards to warn low flying planes.


Increased cases of vandalism


Engage the public to report vandalism through use of manned hotlines.
Rapid response to deter any reported cases of impeding vandalism.
Consider use of advanced technology to deter vandalism by product modification or enhanced detection.
Lobby the Government to elevate the crime of vandalism of electrical installation to the level of economic sabotage.
Monitor number of attempted and accomplished vandalism.


Fire outbreaks


Maintain the way-leaves free of fire fuel
Partner with other agencies such as KWS and KFS in fire surveillance and fire fighting.
Undertake regular fire drills.
Monitor number of fire outbreaks.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Lamu County.
(d) County Director of Environment, Tana River County.
(e) County Director of Environment, Kitui County.
(f)  County Director of Environment, Machakos County.
(g) County Director of Environment, Garissa County.
(h) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6742401              National Environment Management Authority.

