
				Page: 301GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 984
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED HOUSING SCHEME ON L.R. NO. 209/19715 AT IMARA DAIMA IN NAIROBI COUNTY.
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Bangal Trading Company Limited) is proposing to construct a Housing Scheme located off Tegla Lorupe road on L.R. No. 209/19715 at Imara Daima in Nairobi County. The proposed project will entail the construction in phases of 4 blocks containing 167 one Bedroom units, 6 Blocks containing 160 Two Bedroom units, Kindergarten and Commercial Centre with shops, and a restaurant with parking spaces for residents and visitors on the ground floors.
 The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact 


Proposed Mitigation Measures


Vegetation Clearing
 


Minimal clearing of vegetation.
Removal of vegetation to take place only within demarcated construction site.
Non-essential removal of vegetation to be avoided.
No development on slopes with a gradient > 16%
Re-vegetation should incorporate natural vegetation.


Solid wastes
 


Efficient use of materials to minimise on solid waste.
Housekeeping to ensure no littering from packaging materials.
Separation of plastic and paper waste before appropriate disposal.
Paper and glass to be sent for reuse/ recycling.
Disposal of solid waste in accordance with NEMA solid waste disposal regulations.


Liquid Wastes


Concrete batching and mixing should occur at one particular point and the site should be paved and drains provided to ensure polluted water is drained at a particular point.
Prudent use of water to reduce liquid waste volumes.


Noise pollution and visual intrusion


Schedule noisy activities during the normal working hours of between 8am to 5pm. No work should be undertaken at night or very early in the morning.
Put off machines and equipments when not in use.
Ensure machinery is well maintained to reduce noise emitted.
The contractor should adhere to the provision in the Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration pollution) (control) regulations, 2009
Provide  worker  with  appropriate  PPEs  when  working  under  noisy environment e.g. ear plugs
Ensure site is maintained in a cleanly fashion;
Construction completed on time;
Site vegetation correctly according to rehabilitation guidelines stated in the EMP; and
Construction waste is not to enter the biophysical or socio-economic environment. Contractors to produce waste management plans to mitigate potential impacts.


Air/Dust Pollution
 


Practice dust management techniques, including watering  spraying to suppress dust;
Move earth and sand in covered vehicles/ transport to avoid it being blown by wind increasing suspend particulate in the atmosphere;
All plant to be of good condition with acceptable smoke emissions;
Practice selective clearing of vegetation;
Set up dust barriers/ screens at strategic locations;
Provide   and   enforce   the   appropriate   use   of   Personal   Protective Equipment (PPE) against dust such as dust masks.


Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
 


Practice selective vegetation clearing where necessary;
Install adequate storm water management measures;
Replant cleared vegetation as soon as possible;
Avoid vegetation clearing during the rainy season;
Schedule earth moving activities during the dry season.


Increased water demand due to construction works


The contractor should sensitize construction workers on the importance of proper water management through clerks of works by having talks with them when doing their rounds around the site;
Replace or repair leaking pipes supplying water to the construction sites to minimized wastage;
The Contractor should ensure provision of adequate water storage facilities on the construction site to meet project needs during periods of high demand externally and refill of storage tanks during periods of low demand.


Occupational Health & Safety
 


Contractor should ensure registration of all construction works by the Director, Directorate of Occupational Health and Safety Services (DOHSS) in compliance with the Buildings and Works of Construction Engineering Rules, 1984;
Contractor  should  contract  a  qualified  Health  and  Safety  advisor  to conduct training and monitoring of construction works;
The contractor should construct a temporary clinic on site to be run by a qualified nurse who will treat opportunistic ailments and injuries such as cold, malaria etc
Contractor should provide a standard First Aid Kit on site;
The Contractor should train several workers in First Aid depending on the number of workers on site as stipulated in the First Aid Rules 1977 through DOSHS certified First Training institution e.g. Red Cross, St. John Ambulance
Dangerous works should be protected, fenced, demarcated or cordoned off;
Workers should be inducted with training on health and safety by DOSHS certified health and safety advisor so as to enable ensure machinery safety, construction safety, fire safety and electrical safety as well as workplace inspection technique;
Provide and enforce the use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to workers as appropriate such as overalls, safety boots, hand gloves;
The contractor should provide and install firefighting equipment such as fire extinguishers to fight different classes of fire (Class A, B, and C, D).
The   Contractor   should   erect   safety   and   informative   signage   for hazardous is taking place such deep excavations, electrical hazard, signage for personal protective equipment such as helmets, hand gloves and boots and prohibited activities such as smoking;
The  contractor  should  ensure  that  all  plants  to  be  used  during construction such as pressure vessels, lifting machines and cylinders for compressed gas to be examined and inspected by an approved inspector before starting using them to ensure safe usage;
The contractor should develop site Health and Safety guidelines which are to adhered to by construction workers and visitors to the construction site;
Only allow trained and certified workers to handle delicate equipment;
Maintain   an   incident/   accident   register,   in   accordance   with   the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2007, and report incidences to DOHSS


Fire Risks/ Management
 


Place portable fire extinguishers at suitable locations;
Train and induct workers on the use of fire extinguishers and other fire fighting equipments;
Train all staff on fire safety and procedures;
Allocate a fire assembly point;
Ensure   safety   warnings   are   prominently   displayed   at   appropriate locations where fires are likely to occur;
Provide and enforce the use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE);
Develop a Fire Safety Plan through a qualified specialist and implement the provision of the plan at the workplace.


Ground and surface water quality
 


No water abstraction for construction from streams or river;
No mixing of concrete to occur on bare ground. Concrete mixing should be done bunded surface to avoid soil pollution and contaminating the ground and surface water;
Appropriate containment structures to be provided to store contaminated water from the construction site.  The  contractor  should  ensure  these waters are properly disposed and not allowed to be drained on site;
No construction activities to occur in any wetlands;
No concrete batching to occur directly on the ground. Concrete batching area should be bunded to prevent contamination of soils and surface water features;
All fuel storage to be appropriately bunded and provided with a canopy ;
Plant to have drip trays to contain any potential leakages of fuels and oils; and
Ablutions for construction workers to enable proper disposal of fecal matter and avoid contamination of surface water features which could be a cause of waterborne diseases.


Loss of Biodiversity
 


vegetation within the drainage lines is not to be cleared;
modifications to the design of the development to ensure spaces are left to allow for regeneration of loss biodiversity;
Post project restoration of loss habitat through vegetation of affected areas
Compensation by the relocation of important grassland habitats from the development site to another area identified as suitable (using techniques such as s oil or turf transfer), or the creation of new habitats.


Material management
 


To minimize impact of material and waste disposal during the delivery on site the following mitigation measure has been proposed:
Avoid overloading trucks and cover trucks to minimize dust and loss of load from trucks during transportation;
For aggregate and sand,  use water sprays or covered chutes to reduce dust emission during loading and unloading of materials from barges;
Maintain mixing plants in good working condition so as to reduce emission from the plant;
As far as possible, plan truck trips to material source and  to the sites during low traffic hours; and
Implement safety procedures to reduce the potential for road accidents in village or urban areas.


Solid Wastes Management
 


Prudent use of materials to reduce solid waste volumes;
Waste separation to encourage reuse and recycling e.g. plastic and glass bottle;
Sewage from the different houses on site could provide substrate for biogas production which can be utilised by the dwellers for cooking therefore reducing the cost of energy, quantity of waste to be disposed and methane which as a green house gas;
Provision  of  waste  collecting  bins  to  households  which  will  then  be collected for proper disposal by a NEMA licensed waste handler.


Fire Risk /Management


Place portable fire extinguishers at suitable locations;
Induct all the occupants on the fire safety procedures and the use of fire fighting equipments such as fire extinguishers;
Allocate a fire assembly point;
Ensure   safety   warnings   are   prominently   displayed   at   appropriate locations;


Increased pressure on existing utilities
 


Recycling of waste water from the different houses and the recycled water used for irrigation of lawn and flushing of toilets;
Installation  of  solar  panels  on  each  structure  to  provide  alternative source of power for household use;


Noise and vibration
 


Scheduling all the decommissioning works within the normal working hours of between 8am and 5pm;
Adherence to the Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009.


Air pollution
 


Water spraying to suppress dust especially where dust activities are taking place;
Cordoning the site using meshed cloth to capture particulates during demolition of the structures;
Providing   workers   involved   with   appropriate   protective   personal equipments such as dust masks or respirators;

(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, NairobiCounty.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6901271           National Environment Management Authority.
 

