
				Page: 300GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 983
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED ESTABLISHMENT OF A 2.5 MW BIOMASS POWER PLANT USING PROSOPIS JULIFLORA AS FEEDSTOCK ABOUT 1 KM FROM GARISSA TOWN TOWARDS RIVER TANAIN GARISSA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
Pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Northern Energy Limited) is proposing to establish a biomass power plant to produce 2.5MW of electricity using Prosopis juliflora (SW) DC as a feedstock about 1 Km from Garissa Town towards River Tana in Garissa County.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Vegetation loss and Soil erosion
 


The developer will undertake grass and flower planting to avoid the soils being washed or carried by wind. Places of least vegetation cover will be identified and only construction points will be completely cleared to ensure minimum vegetative disturbance.
Wherever possible vegetation within the biomass plant site should be preserved and where plants must be uprooted they should be recycled into use as construction materials, firewood or converted into soil manure.
Plant and maintain flowers and ornamental trees along the paths and around the buildings.


Soil disturbance by vehicle movements, digging of pits and scooping of
Surface soil


Movement of vehicles outside the designated areas to be minimized as much as possible.
Alterations of soil surface should be avoided as much as possible.


Air pollution from moving vehicles
 


Spray water on paths used by vehicle to reduce dust.
When possible vehicles should be used off the peak hours of people and livestock movement.


Noise from machineries and movement of Vehicles
 


Use vehicle and machineries and equipment that are of good mechanical condition.
Ensure the machines used are adequately serviced.
Noise level should be kept within acceptable limits as stipulated in EMCA (Noise and excessive vibrations pollution)
Workers exposed to high noise should wear PPE e.g., ear plugs.


Vibrations on the ground
 


Avoid using heavy equipment that causes vibrations on the ground.
Use mechanisms (where applicable) to reduce transmission of vibrations to the ground.
There should be no vibrations at night when people and most of animals are asleep.


Dust
 


Trucks to avoid driving off road and to spray water on the road during dry seasons to reduce dust.


Flooding
 


Drainage of surface water must be done to avoid water collecting on the surface.
Drainage channels should lead the water to River Tana.


Contamination of water resources
 


Water collected from roof catchments and gutters will be treated control growth contaminant organisms.
Storage tanks will be supplied to trap water and use it for irrigating planted vegetation.


Solid wastes during construction
 


All solid waste must be collected into waste bins and sorted out before taken to landfills.
Wastes should be sorted, re used, and recycled as much as possible.
All wastes to be handled by qualified waster handlers and be disposed in official designated areas.


Liquid wastes during construction
 


All liquid waste must be disposed to pits for evaporation.
All wastes to be handled by qualified waster handlers and be disposed in official designated areas.


Sanitation
 


All workers must have access to toilets, hand washing stations at all times
Mobile toilets if provided should serviced accordingly.


Cultural conflicts between locals and the incoming workers
 


The incoming workers of different cultural backgrounds should not interfere with the local cultures.
Incoming workers should be instructed to respect the local cultural values.


Soil disturbance
Interference with visual aesthetics


The stripped top soils from the site leveling and clearing will be used to build and strengthen the perimeter wall if needed.
Care will be taken not to interfere with the course of the seasonal streams, by leaving clearance of at least 30m from the operations points. This is in keeping with the Legal Notice 120 – Water Quality Regulations 2006.


Emission of hazardous materials
 


All hazardous materials generated and emitted from the plant must be handled by a competent and licensed handler.
Emissions to be monitored on the types and amounts of gases being emitted to make sure they are within acceptable limits as per regulations.


Loss of plant life and associated bio-communities
 
 
 


Although plant diversity is low at the proposed site, the proponent will incorporate greater species diversity in their rehabilitation and landscaping programmes.
Services of knowledgeable curator/botanist will be employed to implement this feature.
Close collaboration and assistance will be sought and built with the Kenya Forest Service and for supply of appropriate forbs seeds and establishing tree nurseries in the rehabilitation programme.


Increased surface runoff and soil erosion
 


Will construct surface rainwater trap pits and cut-off drains to check occasional runoff.
Roof catchment gutters connected to tanks will harvest excess rainwater in the site.
The water would also be used for irrigating planted vegetation, outdoor cleaning such as of vehicles and toilet cleaning, thereby reducing demand on water supply.


Air pollution from dust and engine exhaust gases
 


Prompt compaction of loose soils and aggressive grass replanting will be implemented.
Water will be sprinkled onto the disturbed soil to reduce flying dust.
Employees/ workers will be provided with personal protective equipment (PPE), to reduce possible dust and noxious gas inhalation.


Disposal of Waste into the Environment including solid wastes
 


The construction site will be equipped with toilet and washing facilities fully connected to septic tanks.
Enlisting of a licensed private company specialized in handling oils and solid wastes.
Biodegradable organic wastes will be composted on site for tree planting manure.
A Good housekeeping as part of the company policy will be implemented at the facility.


Fire hazards in the power plant
 


Fire fighting equipments must be installed in all buildings and placed at strategic places within the power plant site.
First aid kits installed should have first aid medicines to treat burns.


Dangers of exposed live electricity wires
 


The site engineer should make sure there are no un insulated live electricity wires that may affect people, livestock and wildlife.
Proper signage to warn public on dangerous areas within the plant.


Health deterioration of facility workers
 


Dust containment and suction systems will be installed on the plant site.
Use of PPEs will be strictly enforced. Welders will be provided with respirators, eye protection equipment and dustcoats to minimize inhalations.
Regular medical checks will be done and records maintained of the employees.
Staff working at the plant will have medical cover.
Sanitation related education and practice would form part of the facility’s regular routine, to avoid incidences of infections such as cholera, bilharzias and malaria.
Swapping of work stations for staff will reduce levels of exposure.


Bodily injuries
and accidents


The contractor will ensure supervision of work and handling of equipment is restricted to only skilled and experience personnel to prevent accidents.
Debriefing on safety procedure for site workers will precede any such works.
Both the contractor and proponent will observe work ethics and worker’s compensation in case of injury or loss.
PPE like helmets, overalls, nose and eyes protection hand gloves and boots, all of suitable quality will be used. Use of PPE like earmuffs will be enforced.

(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Garissa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6901012           National Environment Management Authority.

