
				Page: 2449
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4418

 

NATIONAL MULTI-AGENCY REFUGEES REPATRIATION TEAM
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary for Interior and Co-ordination of National Government, in furtherance of the decision of the Government to repatriate refugees and close Dadaab Refugee Complex, appoints the National Multi-Agency Refugees Repatriation Team (NMARRT).
1.  The Team shall comprise of—
Joseph W. Irungu (Chairperson)
Members:
Amb. Mohamud A. Saleh
Boniface Maingi, A.I.G
Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Dr. Gordon Kihalangwa
Reuben M. Kimotho
Brig.William Shume
Catherine Mogaka
Catherine Bunyassi
Dr. Issack Odongo
Naman Owuor
Amb. Dr Martin Kimani
Henry Ikumiru
Kodeck Makori
Mwenda Njoka
Joint Secretaries:
Wilberforce Kilonzo
Muthoni Kanyugo
2.  The Terms of Reference for the Repatriation Team are to—
(a)     Implement the Report of the National Taskforce on Repatriation of Refugees.
(b)     Engage UNHCR and other relevant stakeholders in the repatriation process.
(c)      Establish the Operational Refugees Repatriation Team (ORRT) in Dadaab.
(d)     Manage the Verification and Repatriation exercise of refugees in Dadaab Refugee Complex.
(e)      Mobilize and co-ordinate the allocation of resources, procurement and utilization of all goods and services required in the repatriation exercise.
(f)       Manage the implementation of the Security Strategy during the repatriation process.
(g)     Manage the implementation of the Communication Strategy during the repatriation process.
(h)     Provide monthly progress reports and returns on the repatriation exercise.
(i)       Prepare and submit the final report on repatriation to the Cabinet Secretary, Interior and Co-ordination of National Government.
3.  In performance of its functions, the Team may:
(a)     Conduct any other activities required for effective discharge of its mandate.
(b)     Co-opt any relevant person to assist in the effective discharge of its mandate.
(c)      Carry out any other relevant function as directed by the Cabinet Secretary, Interior and Co-ordination of National Government.
Dated the 13th June, 2016.
JOSEPH NKAISSERRY,
Cabinet Secretary for Interior
and Co-ordination of National Government.

 

