
				Page: 1428GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3968
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED EASTERN BYPASS TOTAL (K) LIMITED SERVICE STATION ON PLOT NOS. 2/10779 AND 2/10781 IN MITI KENDA AREA, RUIRU, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Total Kenya Limited) is proposing to construct a service station on plots no 2/10779 and 2/10781, in Gatong’ora area along the Eastern Bypass, approximately 4 km from the intersection of Thika Super Highway and the Eastern Bypass in the Miti Kenda area, Gatong’ora ward of Ruiru District, Kiambu County.
The proposed project will comprise; 2 double walled Underground Storage Tanks (UST’s) each of 100,000 Lts, a steel canopy over the pump, service bay, car washing bay with a drainage system, lubes store, an office building comprising management offices, tyre center and sanitary facilities, generator/compressor room a bio-digester, a borehole, underground water tank, elevated water tank, oil water separator, a drive way, store, shop, pharmacy, office and cash room, ATM space, an LPG cylinder storage rack and parking space.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Air Quality


Dust suppression measures such as dampening must be implemented to reduce dust on site during construction;
Construction vehicles travelling along the access roads must adhere to speed limits to avoid creating excessive dust, especially during dry and windy conditions;
Where a dust nuisance is unavoidable, screening is to be provided


Waste Management


The contractor shall provide sufficient closed containers on site which must be placed in the crew camp, to handle the amount of litter, wastes, and builder’s wastes generated on site. Waste skips to be fitted with lids to prevent littering.
Containers shall be emptied once weekly by a licensed waste contractor and disposed off at a municipal waste site.
No solid waste or any materials used may be disposed of on site.
Solid construction waste not posing a pollution hazard should be used on site as a filling material.
No rubble or discarded building material may remain on site for more than one week.
No waste material may be burnt on-site.
Liquid wastes will be collected in original container and stored in bunded area.
A NEMA Licensed waste handler will collect the waste for appropriate disposal.
Chemical containers and packaging brought onto the site must be removed for disposal at a suitable site


Noise and
Vibration


Noise levels shall be kept within acceptable limits, and construction crew must abide by Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution (Control) Regulations 2009.
If work is to be undertaken outside of normal work hours permission, must be obtained. Prior to commencing any such activity the Contractor is also to advise the potentially affected neighboring residents. Notification could include letter-drops.
Construction/management activities involving use of the service vehicle, machinery, hammering etc, must be limited to the hours between 7:00am and 5:30pm weekdays; 7:00am and 1:30pm on Saturdays; no noisy activities may take place on Sundays or Public Holidays
Activities that may disrupt neighbors (e.g. delivery trucks, excessively noisy activities etc) must be preceded by notice being given to the affected neighbors at least 24 hours in advance.
Equipment that is fitted with noise reduction facilities (e.g. side flaps, silencers etc) must be
Used as per operating instructions and maintained properly during site operations.


contamination of soil and ground water


All construction vehicles, plant, machinery and equipment must be properly maintained to prevent leaks.
Plant and vehicles are to be repaired immediately upon developing leaks.
Drip trays shall be supplied for all repair work undertaken on machinery on site or campsite area.
Drip trays are to be utilized during daily greasing and re- fuelling of machinery and to catch incidental spills and pollutants.
Drip trays are to be inspected daily for leaks and effectiveness, and emptied when necessary. This is to be closely monitored during rain events to prevent overflow.
Fuels and chemicals must be stored in adequate storage facilities that are secure, enclosed and bunded.


Fire and Explosions


 All contractors and sub-contractors must be aware of the relevant HSE policy and implementation thereof, in addition to an Emergency Plan and the Environmental Management Plan;
Ensure all staff are trained in what to do in the case of an emergency such as an on-site fire or explosion; The Fire Team must be properly trained and their duties understood;
Ensure all fire-fighting equipment is readily available, accessible and functioning;
Ensure that relevant signage e.g. no smoking, is displayed in potentially dangerous areas and is abided by


Soil and
groundwater
contamination


Subsurface fuel tanks should be placed in concrete encasements with a sump system to prevent spilled fuel from entering the soil and weathered rock.
Staff must be trained adequately so as to identify and minimize the impacts of leaks.
Fuel stock must be monitored on a daily basis.
The UST’s must comply with the relevant standards with respect to tank manufacture and installation.
UST’s must have corrosion protection.
A proper management and monitoring programme be implemented to ensure that the Ground water resources are protected.
Dipstick readings of all the fuel tanks must be taken daily. These records must be kept on site.


Increased insecurity


Installation of security facilities which includes hiring of security guards, installing an alarm system and police patrol will improve the security within the area


Increase in traffic
volumes and
backlogs


The movement of heavy vehicles to and from the site should be conducted during periods of the day when peak flow is minimal. Times that should be avoided are between 0700 to 0900 and 1600 to 1800 during weekdays;
Drivers of these vehicles should be licensed and proficient in driving these vehicles; and
Drivers under the influence of narcotics and alcohol should not be allowed to operate these vehicles and must be removed from the site.
Use of flag men to control the traffic
Implement Total Road Safety programmes

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5021975              National Environment Management Authority.

