
				Page: 2070GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3427
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
ELGEYO MARAKWET COUNTYPUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
ANNUAL REPORT OF ACTIVITIES FOR 2015
The County Government Act, 2012 section 59 (1 and 5) requires County Public Service Boards to submit reports to the County Assembly on the execution of its functions and on the status of promotion of values and principles as stipulated in Article 10 and 232 of the Constitution.
This annual report details key decisions and activities of Elgeyo Marakwet County Public Service for the period of January to December, 2015.
KEY OBJECTIVES TO BE ACHIEVED BETWEEN FY 2014/2019
For the years 2014/2019, the Strategic objectives of the Elgeyo Marakwet County Public Service Board are:
Strategic Issue 1: Performance management framework
Guide in the implementation of performance management framework in the county public service.
Enhancing supervisory mechanisms.
Instituting a clear disciplinary process.
Rewards and sanctions mechanisms put in place.
Inculcate a strong performance based culture.
Cascade clear goals and objectives.
Instituting an M&E framework.
Setting up of departmental Central Planning Units.
Clear prioritization of programs and projects.
Strategic Issue 2: Human Resource Transitional Issues
2.1   Harness human resource management opportunities created by transition processes.
Enhanced communication and feedback on management of human resources during the transition period.
Timely filling of key positions as per County Government Act.
Timely induction and capacity building of new employees.
Institute robust culture change management system.
Strategic Issue 3:  Communication, access and feedback mechanisms
3.1   Enhance shared expectations between staff and senior management
Enhanced participatory consultative forums.
Put in place clear goals and objectives.
Implement manageable span of control as per organization structures.
3.2   Enhance proper communication channels
Adopt ICT and other technologies.
Establish public service open day.
Set up customer feedback mechanisms.
Engage and participate in stakeholder forums.
Streamline organization structure.
Strategic Issue 4:  Competencies, Designation and Deployment of staff  
4.1   Match staff competencies with assigned roles
Establishment of  clear human resource development plans
Develop a comprehensive database on skills and competencies.
Develop and approve departmental structures informed by public service mandates and functions.
Instituting proper/timely staff placement and redeployment
Adequate need-based capacity building and training programs.
Conduct Skill audit.
Strategic Issue 5:  Infrastructural Support 
5.1   Provide adequate and sustainable infrastructural and financial support.
Provide adequate office space.
Prioritize budgetary allocations.
Enhance capacity in procurement processes.
5.2   Automate service delivery.
Prioritize on available resources.
Integration connectivity of software’s and linkages.
Strategic Issue 6:  Work Ethics, Standards and Norms
6.1   Inculcate principles of good governances and values.
Increase awareness on policies and regulations.
Enhance adherence to code of regulations.
Mainstream HIV/AIDS, drug abuse and rehabilitation.  
6.2   Ethical values, culture, Standards and norms in county public service.
Responsive staff to service delivery.
Adequate role modeling in the public service.
Enhanced communication and feedback between all the stakeholders.
Holistic focus on regional balances, constitutional provisions and service delivery.
Strategic Issue 7: Remuneration and schemes of service
7.1   Institute Structured Remunerative Schemes of Service.
Harmonize remunerative structure (LA, devolved functions and new staff) as per SRC guidelines.
Streamline schemes of service and promotion guidelines.
Strategic Issue 8:  Policy and legal framework 
8.1   Develop Appropriate Policy and Legal Framework to Guide Human Resource Development Issues.
Timely domestication of existing policies and formulation of new policies to guide human resource management.
Enhance availability and accessibility of existing policies and laws.
Improve sensitization on key policy and legal issues that impact on public service management.
Strategic Issue 9: Motivation and Welfare
9.1   Develop and facilitate motivational and welfare initiatives.
Collaborate, liaise and disseminate clear structure and systems on pensions schemes.
 Collaborate, liaise, disseminate and implement comprehensive medical scheme.
Put in place leave policy programs.
 Collaborate, liaise, disseminate and implement scholarship programs.
Ensure existence of medical cover and pension schemes.
Improving working environment.
9.2   Undertake continuous staff capacity building initiatives
Establish County school of government as per CIDP.
Ensure adequate funding for trainings.
Develop training Plan.
Ensure adherence to training plan.
Strategic Issue 10: Civic Education Framework
10.1 Develop and facilitate effective and inclusive civic education framework.
Undertake civic education to the public to demand for quality services.
Increase awareness on policies and regulations.
Enhanced participatory consultative forums.
Engage and participate in stakeholder forums.
CHAPTER 2
ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN IN THE YEAR 2015
2.1   Streamlining supervision of staff by departments.
At the beginning of the year, the Board held a two day workshop at Sego club with all offices in charge of Public Service Management in the County, all County Executive Committee Members, Office of the County Secretary, Chief Officers and the Human Resource Office.
The workshop was facilitated by a commissioner from Public Service Commission, Directorate of Public Service Management, Office of the permanent Secretary in charge of Public Service Management and the County Public Service Board.
The Main objective of the workshop was to clarify roles and functions of each office and eventually come up with a memorandum of understanding on effective management of Public Service.
2.2   Civic Education
Section 59 ( 4a) and (i) of The County Government Act gives the County Public Service Board powers to  inform and educate County Public Officers and the public about values and principles and perform any other functions as the Board considers necessary for the promotion of the values and principles. 
The Board did a Ward to Ward visit in the month of September 2015, purposely to engage staff and the public on a one on one interaction on:
(i) Service delivery; and
(ii) Role of the Board in Public Service Management.
2.3   Appointments, training, promotions and retiremnts.
Below are the appointments, trainings, promotions and retirements in the year under review:
Designations 
Number of Appointed Officers
Directors
16
Medical Officers
19
Youth Polytechnic Instructors
22
Reqularized Youth Polytechnic Instructors
31
Reqularized Medical Interns
18
Appointments in Various Departments
30
Reqularized and Appointed Casuals From Former  Local Authorities
80
Appointments Of Persons With Special Needs
4
Promotions in The Department Of Health Services
266
Promotions in The Department Of Agriculture, Livestock Production, Veterinary Services And Fisheries.
115
Trained Staff
21
Retirements 
10
3.0   Status of values and principles in the County
Introduction
This is the 3rd annual report on the realization of national values and principles of governance in Elgeyo Marakwet County Public Service. As outlined in the County Government Act, one of the functions of the County Public Service Board is to promote in the county public service the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 of the constitution, and to evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which they are complied with in the county public service.
These specific Values and Principles include:
(a) high standards of professional ethics;
(b) efficient, effective and economic use of resources;
(c)  responsive, prompt, effective, impartial and equitable provision of services;
(d) involvement of the people in the process of policy making;
(e)  accountability for administrative acts;
(f)   transparency and provision to the public of timely, accurate information;
(g) fair competition and merit as the basis of appointments and promotions, taking into account    representation of Kenya’s diverse communities and affording adequate and equal opportunities for appointment, training and advancement, at all levels of the public service.
The objective of this annual report, is to identify and document the measures taken, progress achieved, challenges faced in the realization of national values and principles of governance by the respective departments in the county public service. Further, the report will provide direction, strategies and interventions that will enhance the promotion of the same.
The national values and principles of governance are fundamental norms and beliefs of Kenyans that guide choices, actions, relations and behaviors of citizens. They are the foundation upon which the realization of Kenya’s national interests is pegged.
Measures taken to promote values and principles in the County
The board is continually, providing leadership in the promotion of values and principles by:
(a) Ensuring that all plans and activities in the County Public Service Board are in accordance with the constitution especially Articles 10 and 232.
(b) Ensuring that public officers comply with the provisions of the public officers Ethics   Act, 2003 through the wealth declaration process.
(c)  Ensuring that all processes of service delivery accord adequate and equal opportunities to all citizens by ensuring fairness, transparency and affirmative action during employment and performance management appraisal.
(d) communicating through letters and meetings measures to be taken by all departments to promote values and principles in all public offices and service facilities in the county,
(e)  Cooperating and partnering with the general public, national and county institutions to promote and monitor for values and principles in the public service.
(f)   Forming a committee within the board known as “Audit, Governance and Compliance” charged with the responsibility of developing a work plan to ensure that the values and principles are complied with, in the county public service
(g) Preparing values and principles monitoring tool to assess the extent and progress of compliance.
(h) Visiting departments to check and report on the extent to which the values and principles are complied.
Progress achieved by the board
The Audit, Governance and Compliance committee carried out an  audit in the HR department in the ministry of ICT, Administration and Public Service management, Treasury department in the ministry of finance and economic planning, and in Iten Referral Hospital in the ministry of Health and the focus were on the following—
(a) a departmental review on HR management and operational excellence and,
(b) a check on compliance with national values and principles of Governance in three departments
The tools used by the county public service board in the three departments visited indicate the extent to which national values and principles of governance have been integrated into their systems and processes in regard to application of policy guidelines and decisions.
Progress achieved in the departments
(a) Availability of policy framework and customer charters
(a) Remarkable application of the national values and principles of governance administratively
(b) there is significant level of compliance with the requirement for high professional and ethical standards
(c)  Accountability and transparency is fairly good.
(d) Level of compliance with the principle of efficiency and effectiveness is relatively good.
Challenges
(a) Lack of enough funds to provide materials and trainings to the staff.
(b) Lack of enough staff in the departments.
(c)  Training opportunities for professionals favor senior officers.
(d) Imbalance in ethnic representation and in representation of persons with disabilities in the service.
(e)  prolonged absence of functional board in the case  of Iten  County Referral Hospital
(f)   No accurate data in the departments recording the extent of compliance of the values and principles of good governance.
(g) CARPS process is delaying the roll out of proper organization structures, staff establishments and clear responsibility matrix.
Recommendations made by CPSB to all departments in the county public service following the audit.
(a) Development of customer service delivery charters in line with the provisions on national values and principles of governance.
(b) Continuous training, awareness creation and dissemination of programs on national values and principles of governance in a user friendly language.
(c)  Systemic and administrative actions put in place to hold the state and public officers to account for violating national values and principles of governance.
(d) Codes of conduct put in place to enforce compliance with the national values and principles of governance.
(e)  Reporting on the extent to which national values and principles of governance have been integrated into the annual performance contracting procedures.
(f)   Provision of Information, Education and Communication on national values and principles of governance to both staff and other stakeholders.
(g) The need for procedures to guide the identification of national values and principles of governance champions.
(h) Mainstreaming and strengthening of national values and principles of governance compliance committees internally to promote, monitor, evaluate and periodically report on the same.
4.0   Annual Public Service Human Resource Management Convention
Pursuant to the Constitution, the County Public Service Board is established to ensure that the organization, staffing and functioning of the County Public Service achieves efficient, quality and productive services for the people of the county. Sec 59 (1) h of the County Government Act requires the County Public Service Board to advise the County Government on human resource management and development.
Accordingly, the Public Service Board held its annual convention on 11th September 2015, to harmonize understanding on human resource management policies and to find ways of reducing bureaucratic bottlenecks and provide solutions for challenges experienced while managing the county public service.
5.0   Board plans for the year 2016
The Board will carry out the following activities in the year 2016.
1.  Inculcate principles of good governance and values.
The Board will review the organizational structure of the county and for specific departments for optimal staffing and control.
The Board will also provide relevant training for all supervisors to enhance service delivery and supervision in departments.
2.  Improve service delivery feedback mechanisms
The Board will undertake quarterly civic education and sensitization forums in all sub counties to update and share on new policies, get feedback on service delivery from both staff and the public and the County stakeholders in general.
The Board will also develop a county public service calendar where stakeholders can participate in receiving and disseminating information to the general public.
3.  Develop  continues staff capacity programmes
The Board will continually advice and encourage all authorized officers in departments to set aside sufficient resources for staff training and induction.
4.  Enhance Supervisory Mechanisms in departments through routine checks and audits in departments
Adherence to constitutional provisions and policies
5.  Deliberate move to recruit people with disability
Preference to non dominant ethnic groups in the County in future recruitments
6.0   Challenges experienced by the board in the year 2015
The year 2015 has been quite challenging for the Board. Two Board members resigned to take up other responsibilities with their parent employers. This affected Board meetings and activities as the remaining Board members were left to handle the assignments left by the two.
Board facilitation, especially members serving on part time was also greatly affected. The budget allocated to the Board was so small that Board operations almost became difficult. The Board could not pay sitting allowances for members serving on part time, nor attend national Board meetings and trainings.
Pending bills also accumulated, especially for consumable materials for day to day operations of the Board.
7.0   Conclussion
The Board is committed to building the public service of the county and ultimately have a diverse, effective and strong workforce that will serve the interest of the county. With the support of stakeholders and goodwill, the Board will achieve most of its strategic objectives.
Dated the 24th February, 2016.
GIDEON KIPYAKWAI,
MR/9370620                  Chairman, County Public Service Board.

