
				Page: 1147GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3299
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE FOR THE GOVERNMENT DIGITAL PAYMENTS PROGRAMME
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the President and Commander in Chief of the Defence Forces has established the following Governance Structure to implement Government Digital Payments—
1.  The Task Force:
Justus Nyamunga—the National Treasury—(Chairman).
Bernard Ndungu—the National Treasury—(Co-Chair).
Peter Kariuki—Executive Office of the President.
John Njiraini—Kenya Revenue Authority.
Victor Kyalo—ICT Authority.
Mark Lesiit—Central Bank of Kenya.
Muthoni Kimani—Attorney-General’s Office.
Bernice Gachegu—State Law Office.
Mosses Serem—Judiciary.
George Anyango—IPRS/Ministry of Interior and Co-ordination of National Government.
Chief Executive Officer—Kenya Trade Network.
Head of Secretariat—Government Digital Payments Secretariat.
2.  Mandate:
The Mandate of the Task force is to implement Government Digital Payments Programme so as to ensure that individuals and businesses are enabled to make payments for government services electronically through all available channels.
3.  In performance of its mandate, the Taskforce shall be responsible for and have authority to—
(a) co-ordinate and provide strategic leadership in the development and implementation of the Government Digital Payments Programme;
(b) develop and review policy, legislative and any other recommendations on the implementation of the Government Digital Payments Programme for the approval of Cabinet or any other authorized;
(c)  promote participation of stakeholders including the private sector, especially youth enterprises in provision and facilitation of  Government digital payment services;
(d) continuously identify and catalogue all in–bound payments made to  Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies;
(e)  review existing Ministries, Departments and Agencies in–bound payment leg business procedures and workflows and develop technical requirements, service charters and timelines for automation of the same;
(f)   implement the business process re-engineering and automation of the payment leg processes within Ministries and Agencies;
(g) identify and approve the establishment of all Government Digital Payments delivery channels    including online and mobile platforms, attendant technology infrastructure and, equipment;
(h) review and build technical and human capacity for running Government Digital Payment Systems and propose requisite technical capacity and staffing skills levels for effective and efficient Digital Payments service delivery;
(i)   develop and operationalize the Government Digital Payments Gateway platform and framework and requisite service delivery standards;
(j)   access content and data within the respective Ministries, Departments and Agencies custody to facilitate  Government Digital Payment platforms;
(k)  source, commit and deploy financial, human and other resources necessary for the implementation of the Government Digital Payments Programme;
(l)   identify and commission technical services and partners including liaising and partnering with entities in the domestic and international public and private sector for the implementation of Digital payments in Government;
(m)carry out a public education campaign on the migration to Government digital Payments platform; and
(n) perform any other function necessary to ensure effective implementation and co-ordination of the Government Digital Payments Programme and realization of its objectives.
4.  In the performance of its functions, the Taskforce shall—
(a) hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the Taskforce shall, consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions shall regulate its own procedures; and
(a) recruit a full time Secretariat for the effective performance of its functions.
5.  The Taskforce shall prepare and submit progress reports once every month to the H.E. the President and the Cabinet Committee on digital payments through the Chief of Staff and Head of the Public Service to whom they shall be answerable.
6.  The Task Force may co-opt such persons from designated institutions as it considers necessary for the performance of its functions.
7.  Government Digital Payments Secretariat:
The Government Digital Payments Secretariat shall consist of—
(a) a Head of Secretariat;
(b) such other persons as may be necessary for the performance of the functions of the Secretariat; and
(c)  Shall be organizationally under the Executive Office of the President.
The members of the Secretariat shall be appointed by the Chief of Staff and Head of the Public Service.
8.  Functions of the Government Digital Payments Secretariat
The Secretariat shall be responsible for –
(a) the day to day implementation of the Government Digital Payments programme;
(b) the implementation of the decisions of the Taskforce on Government Digital Payments;
(c)  the management and co-ordination of the operations, staff, finances and physical facilities to support the Government Digital Payments programme;
(d) preparation of reports;
(e)  monitoring and evaluating the performance of the Government Digital Payments programme; and
(f)   undertaking any other functions as may be directed by the Taskforce.
Dated the 8th May, 2015.
JOSEPH KINYUA,
Chief of Staff and Head of Public Service.

