
				Page: 2735GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  8581
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED GREAT WALL GARDENS MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT, ON PLOT L.R. NO. 27317/2, IN MAVOKO OF MACHAKOS COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project
The Proponent, Erdemann Property Limited, is proposing Great Wall Gardens Mixed Use Development, on Plot L.R No. 27317/2, in Mavoko of Machakos County. The project comprises, residential units: 2000 units (1000, 2-bedroom and 1000, 3-bedroom units), ground floor + 5 floors, parking on ground floor, a commercial centre comprising a supermarket, ATM lobby and shops, a nursery school, commercial and residential parking slots of 229 and 4449 slots respectively, a new boundary wall to match the existing one, development utilities (water, sewer line, drainage, pavements, connection to Kenya Power grid) among others. This development will be in three phases.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts 


Mitigation Measures 


Construction Phase 


Air pollution and dust generation
 


Spraying of water during construction work.
Control of speed and movements of construction vehicles.
Building a buffer fence around the construction site.
Use of low-sulphur diesel for diesel-operated construction machinery.
Provision of PPE.


Noise pollution
 
 


No unnecessary hooting by project and building occupants vehicles.
Use of ear protection aids by construction workers.
Use of attenuated equipment.
Temporarily fencing off noisy machinery such as vibrators.


Generation of solid waste
 


Re-use of soil for landscaping.
Re-use of construction debris as basement for parking yard.
Proper containment and disposal of solid waste.
Contracting a licensed waste collection and disposal company at operation stage.
Use of soil and construction debris for rehabilitation of quarry pits.
Sensitizing construction workers and building occupants on proper waste disposal and material re-use.
Re-use of timber off-cuts and wooden supports for fuel.  


Health and safety
 


Construction workers to be provided with appropriate PPE.
Site to be sprinkled with water to minimize dust.
Use of stable ladders and other climbing/support structures.
Sensitize workers in construction safety measures.
Cleanliness and organization at the construction site.
Fencing or covering of risky areas such as deep pits.
Safety signage.
Use of permit-to-work authorizer for risky jobs.
Engagement of skilled labourers.
Insurance of workers.


Fire hazards and accidents
 


Acquire fire fighting facilities.
Sensitize workers in fire safety.
Proper disposal of solid waste.
No storage of inflammables on site.
Keep well stocked first aid box.
Proper handling and use of tools and machinery.
Use of correct PPE.


Security
 


Ensure that the site is always guarded by a reputable security firm.
Constant site patrol.
Adequate screening of visitors to the site.
Collaboration with existing security machinery.
Partnership with neighbours and police in community policing.


Decommissioning Phase


Decommissioning (Demolition Waste)
 


Use of an integrated solid waste management system.
Where recycling /reuse of the machinery equipment, partitions and other demolition waste is not possible, the material should be taken to a licensed waste disposal.
Implement an appropriate re-vegetation landscaping programme to restore the site to its original status. Consider planting of indigenous species when restoring the site to its original status.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources and Regional Development Authorities, NHIF Building, 12th Floor, Ragati Road, Upper Hill, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(b) Director General, NEMA Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. BOX: 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Machakos County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision-making process for this project.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/8477326         National Environment Management Authority.

