
				Page: 2708GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  8504
THE JUDICIARY TECHNICAL COMMITTEE TO DEVELOP A CRIMINAL PROCEDURE BENCHBOOK
APPOINTMENT
PURSUANT to Article 48 and 161(1)(a) of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 and section 5(2)(c) of the Judicial Service Act, the Chief Justice of the Republic of Kenya has appointed a Technical Committee to develop a Criminal Procedure Benchbook for the Judiciary aimed at providing judicial officers with a thorough and comprehensive guide and reference resource on all aspects of criminal procedure and thereby substantively and procedurally improving the dispensation of justice through the criminal trial process.
The Technical Committee shall comprise of the following members —
Lady Justice Hannah Okwengu, Judiciary—(Chairperson)
The Director of Public Prosecutions or his or her representative
The Inspector-General of the Kenya Police Service or his or her representative
Justice Kathurima M’Inoti, Judiciary
Justice Joel Ngugi, Director, Judiciary Training Institute
Justice William Ouko (Prof.), Judiciary
Justice Edward Muriithi, Judiciary
Denis Mikoyan, Judiciary Training Institute
Felix Kombo, Judiciary
Jill Ghai (Dr.), Katiba Institute
Co-ordinator
Masha Baraza (Dr.)
2. The Terms of Reference of the Committee are to develop a Criminal Procedure Benchbook for the Judiciary of Kenya that will provide judicial officers with a thorough and comprehensive guide and reference resource on all aspects of criminal procedure.
3. The Committee may—
(a)      Co-opt such other persons, who possess the appropriate competencies as are necessary for the performance of the terms of reference.
(b)     Engage such expert(s) as may be necessary for the better fulfillment of its tasks;
(c)      Seek and mobilise financial support as is appropriate for the effective realization of its mandate.
4.  The Committee shall—
(a)      Be guided by the Constitution;
(b)     Prepare a detailed work plan and implementation strategy.
(c)      Engage stakeholders in the justice sector.
5.  The Committee shall regulate its own procedure.
6.  The Committee shall regularly report to the Deputy Chief Justice.
7.  The term of the Committee shall be for an initial period of six (6) months from the effective date.
Dated the 10th November, 2015.
WILLY MUTUNGA,
Chief Justice of the Republic of Kenya.

