
				Page: 2709GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  8507
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
APPOINTMENT OF THE TASKFORCE ON THE REVIEW OF ALLEGED INPAID CLAIMS BY CONTRACTORS AND SUPPLIERS IN THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NYERI
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general public that the Ag. County Executive Member for Lands and Infrastructure, County Government of Nyeri in consultation with the County Executive Committee, has appointed a Taskforce to review claims allegedly arising out of civil contractual works and supplies to the County Government. The Task Force comprises of the following—

Amos Kanyai


Chairman, County Assembly Committee for Roads.


Michael W. Maitha (Eng.)


Department of Lands and Infrastructure.


Charles N. Gathogo                


Department of Lands and Infrastructure.


Samuel Njuguna     


Kenya Rural Roads Authority.


Peter Gathua Kwiga                


Kenya Urban Roads Authority.


George Karimi


Auditor.


Eustace Murage


Department of Finance.


Dennis Karuai


Procurement.

The Term of the Taskforce is a period of thirty (30) days. Provided that the Executive may extend the term of the Taskforce for not more than thirty (30) days
The Terms of Reference for the Taskforce shall be to:
(a)      Review the civil contractual works carried out on the county roads by various civil contractors;
(b)     Review the procedures used  in awarding and/or engagement of the such contractors and suppliers;
(c)      Review of the quality of works claimed to have been done/goods supplies with a view to verifying the unpaid claims;
(d)     Consider and make appropriate  proposals   on   how the claims, once verified, may be settled;
(e)      Carry out such other functions as may be necessary or incidental to the foregoing; and
(f)      Prepare a report on all the ToRs, making administrative and operational reforms and any other findings such as might assist the County Government deal with the issues at hand conclusively.
In the performance of its tasks under paragraph 3, the Task force —
(a)      Shall put out an advertisement in print media requesting all contractors and suppliers with pending claims on contractual works on county roads to forward their claims to the task force;
(b)     shall consult with key stakeholders in preparing their report on the review;
(c)      shall hold such number of meetings in the places and at such times as the Taskforce may consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions;
(d)     may take into consideration such past reports or other relevant documents for purposes of preparing their report on the foregoing;
(e)      may co–opt any person(s) as it may consider necessary or expedient for the proper performance of its functions;
(f)      may have all powers necessary or expedient for the proper execution of its functions, including power it regulate its own procedure;
(g)      may create committee or sub-committee to expedite the discharge of its task. 
The Secretariat to the Taskforce
The Secretariat to the Taskforce shall be provided for by the Department of Lands and Infrastructure which shall also—
(a)      provide the appropriate background briefing to the Taskforce;
(b)     provide any documents that shall be relevant for the Task force to effectively carry out its functions;
(c)      prepare the reports of the Taskforce and disseminating any information deemed necessary to the Taskforce ; and
(d)     undertaking research and liaising with the relevant departments, and other institutions or stake holders with a view of enabling the task force gather all the relevant information to carry out its functions 
Dated the 10th November, 2015
JOSEPH KIRAGU,
Ag. County Executive Member, 
MR/8449184                          Lands, Infrastructure and Housing.

