
				Page: 3078GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8171
THE COMPETITION ACT
(No. 12 of 2010)
FERTILIZER MARKET INQUIRY/SECTOR STUDY
IN EXERCISE  of the powers conferred by section 18 (1) (a) of the Competition Act, 2010, the Competition Authority notifies the public that it intends to carry out a market inquiry in the fertilizer sector.
 The Centre for Competition, Regulation and Economic Development, University of Johannesburg (herein “the Consultant”) has been identified to carry out the inquiry as follows:
The terms of Reference of the fertilizer market inquiry sector/study shall be to—
(a) examine the market structure in the fertilizer sector in Kenya;
(b) determine cost components and price determinants of retailed fertilizer;
(c)  determine the fertilizer current demand/consumption levels at regional and national levels;
(d) assess whether fertilizer subsidy program is efficient and encouraging to the business sector;
(e)  engage the stakeholders in the fertilizer sector, who include—
(i)       importers;
(ii)     wholesalers;
(iii)    agro-dealers/retailers;
(iv)    transporters and freight forwarders;
(v)     farmers and other end users;
(vi)    industry associations;
(vii)   the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries;
(viii) National Cereals and Produce Board; and
(ix)    The Kenya Revenue Authority.
in order to appreciate the conditions affecting competition and consumer protection in the fertilizer sector;
(f)   recommend alternative ways to address competition issues in the fertilizer sector premised on international best practice; and
(g) make recommendations to the Authority on any matter that requires regulatory intervention in order to increase competition and consumer protection in the fertilizer sector.
In the performance of its functions, the Consultant—
(a) shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as it may, in consultation with the Authority, consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions, and
 (b)     may use official reports of any previous investigations, policies and legislation relevant to its mandate.
 Members of the public with relevant information may submit oral or written information to the Secretariat of the Consultant within twenty-one (21) days of the publication of this notice.
The Secretariat shall be based at the Authority’s offices located at Kenya Railways Staff Retirement Benefit Scheme Building, Block ‘D’, 1st Floor, Haile Selassie Avenue, P.O. Box 36265–00200 Nairobi. Email: info@cak.go.ke
Dated the 6th November, 2014.
WANG’OMBE KARIUKI,
Director- General

