
				Page: 63GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2589
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MIXED DEVELOPMENT PROJECT ON PLOT L.R. No. 209/8760.OFF HAILE SELASSIE ROAD, UPPER HILL, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent Greenfield Developers Limited, is proposing to construct a thirty five storey mixed use development on plot L.R.  No.  209/8760  located  in  Upper  Hill,  off  Haile  Selassie  Road.  The proposed development will mainly comprise of office space, retail space, apartments, serviced apartments, a hotel, retail parking and associated ancillary facilities within the proposed plot.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Positive impacts


Impact Description


Employment opportunities


The construction and operation of the proposed Project are expected to offer employment opportunities; these range from unskilled, casual workers, semi-skilled and formal employees.


Impacts on local and  national economy


Gains in the local economy will result from the utilization of locally available materials including: building stones, iron sheets, timber, bricks, paint, electrical cables, water storage equipments, water pipes, steel, glasses, fencing posts, sand, cement, fuels, etc. and paying of taxes to the government.


Optimal land use


Change  in  land  use  from  underutilized  land  to  land  on  which  a modern high-rise development stands will optimize land use in the area.


Improved  infrastructure


The operation of the proposed Project may induce improvements in infrastructure  around  the  facility  e.g. improved  roads,  electricity connection,  regular  maintenance  of  roads,  storm  water  drainages and power lines around the building and environs.


Noise and vibrations generation


Comply with maximum permissible noise levels for constructions sites  as  per  Second  Schedule  of  the  Environmental  Management and  Co-ordination  (Noise  and  Excessive  Vibration  Pollution Control) Regulations, 2009; apply  for  a  license  from  NEMA whereby  maximum  permissible noise levels are to be exceeded; Prescribe noise reduction measures e.g. restricted working hours, transportation hours and noise buffering; Install  portable  barriers  to  shield  compressors  and  stationary equipment  where  necessary  and  locate  stationary  noise  sources as far from existing sensitive receptors as possible;
Use quiet equipment (i.e. equipment designed with noise control elements such as mufflers).



Air pollution (dust and exhaust emissions)


Provide 2.4 meter high hoarding along site boundary; Provide  effective  dust  screen,  sheeting  or  netting  where  a scaffolding  is  erected  around  the  perimeter  of  a  building  under construction,  from  the  ground  floor  level of  the  building,  or  if  a canopy is provided at the first floor level, from the first floor level, up to the highest level of the scaffolding; Any  skip  hoist  for  material  transport  shall  be  totally  enclosed  by impervious sheeting; Water all active construction areas when necessary; Cover  all  trucks  hauling  soil,  sand  and  other  loose  materials  or require all trucks to maintain at least two feet of freeboard; Pave,  apply  water  when  necessary,  or  apply  (non-toxic)  soil stabilizers on all unpaved access roads, parking areas and staging areas at construction site; Down wash of trucks (especially tyres) prior to departure from site; Use  of  electrically  operated  construction  machinery  to  avoid externalities produced by diesel engines.


Health and safety risks


Security shall be enhanced by ensuring security guards are always posted within and around the project site and strategic placement of security lights around the site; a roster of all construction workers shall be kept while measures shall be put in place to ensure that loitering by itinerant workers is discouraged; unattended  public  access  to  the construction  site  shall  be restricted and only one entry/exit point shall be used; Appropriate health and safety measures shall be implemented as per the OSHA Act 2007; warning signs should be placed in appropriate places; Safety education and training of the construction workers should be undertaken; appropriate personal Protective Gear shall be worn at all times by all within the construction site including visitors; Install appropriate fire management equipment


Deep trenching/ excavation risks


A barricade at least 3 feet high must be erected around a trench that is 1 meter or more deep excavated material should not be placed less than 4 feet from the edge of a trench to minimize risk of collapse due to the weight of the spoil; where a possibility of collapse or cave of an excavation exists, it should be shored, shielded, benched or battered to prevent the collapse or cave-in; ladders  must  be  provided  no  more  than  20  meters  apart  in  the area where excavation works are being carried out.


Soil erosion and water logging


Terrace,  level  and  rip  off  compacted  areas  of  the  project  site  to reduce  run-off  velocity  and  increase  infiltration  of  storm  water into the soil; dig  trenches  and  cut  off  drains  to  channel  runoff  into  existing peripheral storm water drains; Surface  runoff  should  be  harvested  where  applicable  for  reuse during construction works.


Waste generation


Use  durable,  long-lasting  materials  that  will  not  need  to  be replaced  often,  thereby  reducing  the  amount  of  construction waste generated over time; Provide  facilities for  proper  handling and storage of construction materials  to  reduce  the  amount  of  waste  caused  by  damage  or exposure to the elements; Use  building  materials  that  have  minimal  packaging  to  avoid  the generation of excessive packaging waste; use  construction  materials  containing  recycled  content  when possible and in accordance with accepted standards; Ensure adequate collection and storage of waste on site and safe transportation  to  licensed  disposal  sites  by  licensed  waste handlers.


Increased traffic


Any  work  that  disturbs  normal  traffic  signal  operations  shall  be coordinated with the relevant authorities; Ensure  that  the  Entry/Exit  to  the  project  site  is  located  where  it will cause minimal traffic along Haile Selassie and Lower Hill Roads; Ensure  all construction vehicles to and from the construction site use the designated Entry/Exit to the project site.
All  transportation  of  construction  raw  materials  and  excavated materials are to be conducted at traffic off peak hours only; Cover  all  trucks  hauling  soil,  sand  and  other  loose  materials  to avoid spillage and dust emissions that may interfere with smooth motoring; “NO  PARKING”  signs  will  be  posted  around  the  building  where Parking  is  prohibited  and  likely  to  cause  obstruction  as  well  as other necessary traffic signs; Traffic  management/parking  personnel  shall  be  provided  to monitor parking and ensure smooth motoring along the buildings adjacent roads.


Increased water  demand


Promote  awareness  on  water  conservation  and  reducing  water wastage.
Reduce water delivery in taps, through the installation of low flow devices or aerators on taps; Press action taps, flush valves and urinal sensors shall be used to minimize water wastage in public washrooms; Install water efficient plumbing.


Increased energy demand


Improve lighting efficiency by efficient  window  placement during project design (day-lighting); Identify  and  use  equipment/systems  having  minimum  energy consumption; Audit energy use occasionally; Use alternative energy sources such as solar power; Other mitigation measures are outlined within the report.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and Regional Development Authorities, N.H.I.F. Building, 12th Floor, Ragati Road, Upper Hill, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8858264         National Environment Management Authority.

