
				Page: 1143GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4228
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ON A 144 ACRE PLOT, L.R. NO. 24605/4 ALONG HILL CREST PARK ROAD OFF MOMBASA ROAD, MAVOKO MUNICIPALITY, MACHAKOS
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed residential estate.
The proposed project entails construction of three thousand mixed housing units. The development will be implemented in phases depending on the success of the predecessor phases and it will entail apartments, maisonettes, duplex units, community clinic/dispensary, and sewer treatment plant, artificial lake, Bus Park and many other supporting utilities.
The project is located on plot L.R No. 24605/4, Athi River, Mavoko Municipality next to sun-rose Flowers Ltd along Hill Crest Park Road (approximately 4Km from Mombasa road).
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Soil erosion and compaction


The contractor will provide adequate soil conservation structures to ensure that areas prone to soil erosion are protected from runoff.


 


Avoid steep slopes.


 


Areas susceptible to erosion shall be properly sloped and compacted to reduce the effect of runoff, and shall be seeded immediately.


 


Rehabilitation of exposed sites as soon as practicable.


 


Ensure that the proposed project does not increase in erosion and sedimentation of the river.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


 


The site preparation activity should be scheduled.


 


Riverine vegetation shall be minimally disturbed during the construction phase to reduce soil erosion and safeguard river bank protection.


 


Re-plant degraded areas with local species common in the area to complement natural vegetation regeneration to improve ground cover.


Occupational health and safety


Ensure that building plans are approved by Mavoko Municipality Council.


 


Workers will be provided with adequate PFEs during the construction phase, these will include working boots, overalls, helmets, goggles, earmuffs and goggles. Workers will also be provided with harnesses and proper secure equipment s for scaling heights.


 


Workers will be provided with a well stocked first aid box, which will be replenished at all times and managed by trained first aiders.


 


The proponent will ensure that the contractor thro’ the project manager obtain a workmen’s act, as well as ordinance and regulations.


 


Adequate sanitary facilitates will be provided with proper segregation for both genders where applicable.


 


The contractor will ensure that people providing food to the workers have been sensitized on the safe handling of food to avoid outbreaks of food poisoning.


Air and dust pollution


The contractor to protect stockpiles of friable material subject to wind- throw by wetting, or with barrier, vegetable, or windscreen.


 


Restrict speed on loose surface roads during dry or dusty conditions; incidence.


 


Suppress dust during dry periods by use of water sprays.


 


Maintain equipment in good running condition-no vehicle to be used that generates excessive black  smoke.


 


Enforce vehicle load restrictions to avoid excess emissions from engine overloading.


 


The contractor shall institute appropriate measures to minimize or avoid air quality impacts. This can be achieved through formulation of air quality  management plan.


 


The contractor to minimize/control emission of dust due to traffic movement and erosion of stockpile material and exposed soil.


 


The contractor to ensure that all equipment used and all facilitates erected on site are designed and operated to control the emission of smoke, dust, fumes and any other air impurity into the atmosphere.


Noise pollution and excessive vibration


The contractor shall comply with the legal requirements for the managements of the noise impact specified in the recently gazetted noise quality regulations.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


 


The contractor shall formulate noise management plan for minimizing the generation of noise and vibration from construction activities occurring on site and its impact on surrounding residents, businesses and workers.


 


All internal combustion equipment will have properly functioning silencers ort mufflers.


 


Neighbours to the site to be notified about the construction schedule and activities, including blasting, should it be required.


 


Noise generating activities that take place near residential or sensitive institutional receptors will be restricted to between 0600-2000hrs, which is defined as ‘daytime’ in the Kenyan noise regulations.


Increase in solid waste


Proponent will use an integrated solid waste management system by source reduction, recycling, composting, reuse or sanitary land filling.


 


The proponent will ensure that debris is collected by a NEMA approved waste handlers.


 


There will be central collection point for waste generated preferably with segregation of the same.


 


The proponent will provide or construct proper waste receptacles to avoid littering.


Effluent disposal


The proponent will use waste treatment plant as shown on the site plan for effluent management.


 


The proponent will ensure that the materials used for construction are of the right standards as per the building code.


 


The proponent will ensure that required standards of effluent are maintained before disposal is done through quarterly laboratory analysis.


 


The proponent will ensure that there are routine checks for the sewer lines to ensure that there are no leakages.


Security
Traffic movement for construction vehicles


The proponent will ensure that guards are available and proper intrusion surveillance equipments are installed and are working all the times.


 


The proponent will ensure that there is adequate lighting in all areas and risk assessment is done regularly to identify any new threats.


 


The proponent will ensure the neighbours are informed through signage about irregular movements and guards to be used to direct traffic


Water resources and water quality


Measures shall be instituted to minimize erosion and sediment transport, especially during construction activities.


 


These measures should include: limiting areas cleared of vegetation, stabilizing the soils on the sloppy areas with stone pitching and planting of grass.


 


Remedial measures shall be implemented by the Contractor in the event of erosion resulting in the sedimentation of surrounding areas after due consideration of the costs and benefits of such removal activity


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


 


Infrastructure shall be designed to ensure that contaminated run-off does not reach watercourses


 


In the event of an oil spill the procedures contained in the emergency response plan will come into effect.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Eastern Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Machakos District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1681922          National Environment Management Authority.

