
				Page: 1142GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4227
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED 80MW THERMAL POWER PLANT AT THIKA ON PLOT NUMBER L.R. 8380/2
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed 80MW thermal power plant.
The proposed project will consist of five MAN 4-stroke medium speed diesel engines 18V48/60 and a steam turbine with a combined capacity of 80 MW, transformers, cables, switchgear, protection and metering equipment. Generation will be at 15 kV for step-up to 132 kV by a sub-station that will be constructed for the subsequent transmission of the generated electricity.
The project proposed site is along Nairobi-Thika Highway, about 38 km from Nairobi City Centre and 6 km to Thika Town. The site is on plot number L.R. 8380/2, measuring approximately 4 ha (10 acres) next to Mang’u High School and opposite Witeithie Village.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Extraction site impacts to ensure efficient use of raw materials in construction
 


Source building materials from local suppliers who use environmentally friendly processes in their operations.
Ensure accurate budgeting and estimation of actual construction material requirements to ensure that the least amount of material necessary is ordered.
Ensure that damage or loss of materials is kept minimal through proper storage.


Loss of vegetation cover


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area to be affected by construction works.
Introduction and maintenance of vegetation (trees, shrubs and grass) on open spaces and around the site.
Design and implement an appropriate landscaping programme to help in re-vegetation of part of the project area after construction.


Air pollution by dust and VOCs generated during construction process.


All personnel working on the project will be trained prior to starting construction on methods for minimizing air quality impacts during construction.
Construction heavy earth moving vehicle drivers will be under strict instructions to minimize unnecessary trips, refill petrol fuel tanks in the afternoon and minimize idling of engines.
Careful screening of construction site to contain and arrest construction-related dust.
Exposed stockpiles of e.g. dust and sand, will be enclosed, covered, and watered daily, or treated with non-toxic soil binders.
All workers will be required to wear protective gear while on site.
Ensure construction machinery and equipment are well maintained to reduce exhaust gas emission.


Pollution from Hazardous waste


Handling of the materials using the material safety data provided by the manufacturers.
Appoint a safety officer to ensure that proper disposal guideline are observed.
Ensuring that maintenance and/or piece of work carried out on any piece of equipment or construction work is undertaken by qualified personnel.
In case of spillage emergency spillage control measures to be instituted.
Containerization of any wastes and disposal through a licensed waste handler.


Noise and vibration by construction activities


Use of equipment designed with noise control elements will be adopted where necessary.
Trucks used at construction site shall be routed away from noise sensitive areas where feasible.
Idling time for pick-up trucks and other small equipment will be minimized to limited time.
All workers operating in noisy areas or operating noisy equipment will be provided with earpieces to protect against extreme noise.
Comply with L.N. 25: Noise prevention and control rules, 2005.


Workers accidents and hazards when handling hazardous wastes.


Adequate collection and storage of waste will be provided on site, and safe transportation to, and display methods at designated areas.
All receptacles for storing hazardous wastes shall be adequately covered.
All employees will be required to wear protective gear when handling hazardous wastes.
All workers will be adequately insured against unforeseen accidents.


Generation of solid waste


Wastes to be collected regularly to control air pollution and vermin/insects etc.
Receptacles will be provided for waste storage prior to collection.
Resource recovery will be encouraged once the project takes off so as to shrink waste stream and recover non-recyclables.
Refuse collection vehicles will be covered to prevent scatter of wastes by wind.
Wastes will be collected by a licensed operator to avoid illegal final dumping at unauthorized sites.
All persons involved in refuse collection shall be in full protective attire.


Workers accidents during construction process.
 


All workers will be sensitized before construction begins, on how to control accidents related to construction.


 


A comprehensive contingency plan will be prepared before construction begins, on accident response.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


 


Accordingly, adherence to safety procedures will be enforced.


 


All workers to wear protective gear during construction, including helmets.


 


Construction work will be limited to daytime only.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Central Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Thika District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1681922          National Environment Management Authority.

