
				Page: 1140GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3898
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) “COMMON USER” BULK STORAGE AND FILLING DEPOT ON PLOT NO. KISUMU/KASULE/399 AT NYAMASARIA IN KISUMU
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed LPG “common user” bulk storage and filling depot.
The proposed project entails installation of a modern medium size “Common User” LPG storage and filling plant. The depot will be designed in a modular form with an initial storage capacity of 100 metric tonnes and a filling rate of 1000 cylinders per hour. The filling container will be equipped with three electronic filling machines to fill 6kg, 12kg, 25kg and 35kg cylinders. Two (2) machines will be used to fill the 6kg and 12kg cylinders and one (1) machine will be dedicated to the 25kg and 35kg cylinders. The LPG storage will be composed of one (1) LPG tank with a geometrical capacity of 50m³. LPG tank is design to store mixture of Butane/Propane (with maximum propane content of 30%) and is design under the AD2000 code
The project is located in Kisumu East District in Winam Division, at Nyamasaria in Kasule Sub-location in Kisumu, about five kilometers away from Kisumu’s Central Business District (CBD).  It is located on Plot No. Kisumu/Kasule/399 on a 0.39 ha plot.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Erosion and sedimentation
 
 
 
Drainage alteration


Concrete floors and cabro paving in the whole compound.
Installation of traps for stored loose construction materials such as sand.
Channel drains flowing under the perimeter walls and into the roadside drainages and culverts.


Water pollution


Water Sprinkler System.
Ensure effective drainage into the sewer system.
Regular maintenance checks on drainage system.


Dust


Regular watering of access routes to reduce dust.
Provision of dust masks to workers.


Emissions


Use of mufflers on heavy equipment and vehicles.
Reduction in use of machinery to necessary requirement only.
Regular check of gas leak detection system, pipeline seams, pneumatic cut off system and remote operating valves for automatic cut-off of the system to cub greenhouse gas emissions.


Noise


Operation during daylight hours only.
Provision of ear muffs to site workers.
Construction of high perimeter wall around the site.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Devegetation


Minimal excavation.
Revegetation of bare areas.
Planting indigenous trees.


Solid waste disposal


Ensure appropriate waste baskets available in offices.
Outsource a NEMA registered waste disposal agent to collect and dispose of solid waste.


Scrap materials and debris


Use of an integrated solid waste management system.
Waste generated will be characterized in compliance with standard waste management procedures.
Disposal locations will be selected by the contractor and the KCC based on the properties of the particular waste generated.


Vegetation disturbed
 
Soil erosion and drainage problem


Plant grass on areas that are not to be used for pathways and driveways.
Monitoring and inspection of the area for indications of erosion will be conducted and appropriate measures taken to rehabilitate any occurrences.
Fencing and signs restricting access posted to minimize disturbance to newly vegetated areas.
Drains planned and constructed.
Drains kept clean of debris.


Non hazardous waste
 
 


Disposal locations selected by contractor.
Use of an integrated solid waste management system.


Hazardous wastes e.g. spent solvents, oil spent, oil sludge, mercury contaminated and carbon beds


Waste treatment.
Waste generated will be characterized in compliance with standard waste procedures.


Fire and or explosion


Install smoke detectors at strategic locations in the site.
Install gas detection system in a strategic location.
Install fire alarm systems.
Install hose reels system with a connection to a pressurized water supply along perimeter wall.
Place portable fire fighting canisters at conspicuous locations.
Institute speedy evacuation plans and fire drill training.
Install water tank with 500,000m³ of water.
Ensure impervious had standing areas with bunded sides draining away from tank area to hold accidental spillages.
Ensure supervision of deliveries.
Operating procedures instituted.
Install automatic shut-off devices.


Pollution of river Nyamasaria and underground water bodies


Install Riflo Septica Sanitation System.
Install French drain to soak away the waste water.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Nyanza Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Kisumu East District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1681706          National Environment Management Authority.

