
				Page: 1146GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4231
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF RESIDENTIAL APARTMENTS ON PLOT L.R. NO. 12715/503, SYOKIMAU, MACHAKOS DISTRICT
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed construction of residential apartments.
The proposed project entails construction of eighty two (82) housing units each with four (4) bedroom apartments and related supporting infrastructure.
The project is located on plot L. R. NO. 12715/503, Syokimau, Athi River Townships, Mavoko Municipality. The site is currently vacant and is surrounded by othe upcoming residential apartments. The following are the anticipated impact and proposed mitigation measures.

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measure


Increased solid waste


Use of integrated solid waste management of options ie. Source reduction, recycling, composting and re-use, combustion and sanitary land filling.
Ensure that construction materials left over at the end of construction will be used in other projects rather than being disposed.
Dispose waste more responsibly by damping at designated damping sites.
Waste collection bins to be provided at designated points on site.
Re-use packaging materials such as cartons, cement bags, empty metals and plastic containers to reduce waste at the site.
Use construction materials containing recycled content when possible and in accordance with accepted standards.
Use building materials that have minimal or no packaging to avoid the generation of excessive packaging waste.
Use of durable, long lasting materials that will not need to be replaced as often.


Dust Emission


Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weather.


 


Ensure strict enforcement of on site speed limit regulations.


 


Covering of all haulage vehicles carrying sand, aggregate and cement.


 


Stock piles of fine materials (eg. Sand and ballast) should be wetted or covered with tarpaulin during windy conditions.


 


Access roads and exposed grounds must be wetted in a manner at a frequency that effectively keeps down the dust.


Possible Impacts


Mitigation measure


 


Workers in dusty areas on the site should be issued with dust masks during dry and windy conditions.


 


Providing appropriate enclosure for the concrete mix-up.


 


Use of dust nets at high levels of the building.


Noise vibrations


Sensitize construction drivers to avoid running of vehicles engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as church, schools or hospitals.
Ensure the construction machinery are well kept in good condition.
Sensitize construction drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines while not being used.
Ensure all generators and heavy machines are insulated or placed in an enclosure to minimize ambient noise levels.
Restrict noisy construction activities to normal working hours (8 am – 5 pm).
Inform local residents before hand via notices and advisories, of pending noisy periods and solicit their tolerance well before the commencement of pilling works.
Workers operating equipment that generate noise should be equipped with noise protection gear including ear muffs and plugs. Workers operating equipment generating noise levels than 80 dBA  continuously for 8 hours or more should use ear muffs whereas those experiencing prolonged noise levels of 70 – 80 dBA should wear ear plugs.
Limit pick-up trucks and other small equipment to an idling time of 5 minutes, observe a common sense approach to vehicle use, and encourage workers to shut off vehicle engines whenever possible.
All construction equipment should be regularly inspected and serviced.


Oil/Hazardous materials spills


A designated garage section of the site fitted with oil trapping equipment to be planned for changes. Such area will protect the soil from contamination.


 


Refueling and maintenance of large vehicles will not take place at the construction site.


 


All hazardous materials to be stored in appropriately bonded containers and placed on concrete floors.


 


Maintaining spill response kits at the site office.


 


Prepare and display on site spill response procedures.


 


Training of workers on spill response and management.


Safety and Security


Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the construction site.


Hydrology and Water quality Degredation


Hazardous substance control and emergency response plan that will include preparations for quick and safe clean-up of accidental spill.


 


Hazardous materials handling procedures to reduce the potential for a spill during construction to be prescribed.


Possible Impacts


Mitigation measure


 


Identify areas where refueling and vehicle maintenance activities and storage of hazardous materials, if any, will be permitted.


Generation of Waste Water


Provide means for handling sewage generated by construction workers will be through pit latrines.
Ensure the toilets are clean and piping is done up to standards.


Occupational health and Safety Risks


Train workers on use of machines and simple maintenance.


 


Provision of fire fighting mechanisms.


 


Sensitization campaign in STDs and AIDS in the workers.


 


Monitoring solid and effluent disposal.


 


Proper signage on site to warn workers of safety requirements as regards machines with moving parts and other equipment at site.


 


Provide a first aid box and have a trained person to handle site emergencies and incidences.  Display in the site telephone numbers of ambulances or provide a site vehicle to specifically transport the injured to hospital.


 


Provide fire-fighting mechanism at site. Display emergency call numbers that can be used in case of a site fire.


 


Provide safe scaffoldings and railings at heights.


 


Provide washing (enclosed bathrooms) and toilet facilities at site with both drinking and washing water. The number of workers engaged determines the number of toilets and bathrooms provided.


 


Providing safety helmets , safety masks (welders), safety shoes (loaders), uniforms and hand gloves to the workers.


Soil Erosion and Storm Water/Runoff


Ensure that any compacted areas are ripped to reduce run-off.


 


Site excavation works to be planned such that a section is completed and rehabilitated before another section begins.


 


Ensure that the construction vehicles are restricted to graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.


 


Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increased  storm water into the soil.


 


Construction of pavement.


 


Planting of grass.


 


Lining of storm water drains with PCC slabs and invert drains.


 


Designing of a storm water management plan that minimizes impervious area infiltration by use of recharge areas and use of retention with graduated outlet control structure.


Fire Control


Installation of fire extinguishers at strategic points eg. Stores.


 


Have maintenance contract with suppliers and records of inspection kept.


 


Display warning signs eg. “Danger”.


 


“NO SMOKING” prominently within the construction site especially in parts where inflammable substances are stored.


Possible Impacts


Mitigation measure


 


Train workers on emergency procedures.


Traffic Control


Issue notices/advisories of pending traffic inconveniences and solicit tolerance by local residence before the commencement of construction works.


 


As far as possible, transport of construction materials should be scheduled for off-peak traffic hours.


 


Appropriate traffic warning signs, informing road users of a construction site entrance ahead and instructing them to reduce speed, should be placed along the main road in the vicinity of the entrance to the site during the construction period.


 


Flagmen should be employed to control traffic and assist construction vehicles as they enter and exit the project site.


 


Maintain on site a record of incidents and accidents.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Eastern Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Machakos District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1681972          National Environment Management Authority.

