
				Page: 1141GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4226
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED RENOVATIONS OF A PETROL STATION IN TIGONI ALONG OLD LIMURU ROAD
ON PLOT L.R. NO. 11893
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed renovations of a petrol station.
The proposed project highlights include:
Renovating the canopy over the pumps.
Renovating the sales office.
Rehabilitating the septic tank and soak pits.
Repairing the underground fuel tanks.
Repairing the drive ways, walkways, acceleration and deceleration lanes.
Repairing the Interceptor tank.
Renovating the washrooms.
The proposed project site is located at Tigoni Centre, a few metres from the road. The land reference number is L.R. No. 11893 which is a 0.3161Ha piece of land.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Environmental Impacts


Suggested Mitigation Measures 


Air pollution
 


Control speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Spray water on excavated areas.
Maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Sensitize construction workers.
All bare areas should be landscaped after construction.
Workers should be provided with dust masks if working in sensitive areas.


Noise pollution


Maintain plant equipment.
Construction should be carried out only during daytime i.e 0800 – 1700 HRS.
Workers to wear ear muffs if working in noisy section.
Management to ensure that noise from the residents is kept within reasonable levels.


Possible Environmental Impacts


Suggested Mitigation Measures 


Traffic density


Proper signage put in place to notify neighbours of the activity and presence of heavy vehicles and to direct traffic.
Presence of boards directing patrons to the site.
Strict adherence to traffic rules.


Soil erosion & compaction


Provide soils conservation structures on the areas prone to soil erosion to reduce impact of erosion.
There should be designated pathways and driveways for movement within the compound to avoid unnecessary compaction.
All bare areas should be well landscaped after completion.


Solid waste


Construction debris should be collected by a licensed private contracted waste collection company.
Excavation waste should be re-used or backfilled.
Waste generated should be collected by a privately contracted waste collection company and the contractor should ensure the construction of a central waste collection point with bulk storage facilities.
The site should have waste receptacles with bulk storage facilities at convenient points to prevent littering during occupation.


Oil leaks and spills


Machinery should be well maintained to prevent oil leaks.
Contractor should have a designated area where maintenance is carried out and that is protected from rain water.
All oil products should be stored in a site store and handled carefully.


Security


The site will be fenced off using iron sheets during renovation.
Demolish all temporary kiosks on site.
Round the clock security for the facility.
Adequate lighting and an alarm system installed at strategic points.


Occupational Health and Safety


Provide Personal Protective Equipment.
Train workers on personal safety and how to handle equipments and machines.
Report any accidents / incidences and treat and compensate affected workers.
Provide sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences which should be kept clean.
The site will be fenced off using iron sheets during renovation.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Central Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Kiambu West District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1662491          National Environment Management Authority.

