
				Page: 64GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2590
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED OFFICE BLOCK ON L.R. NO 1870/1/153, WESTLANDS AREA OF NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Alexander Forbes Retirement Fund - (Provident Section and Pension Section) is proposing to construct an office block to meet the current demand for office space in Nairobi. The proposed project is split into two phases. Phase 1 includes construction of a 13 storey tower consisting of retail; lobby space on ground floor; retail and commercial lettable spaces on 1st to 3rd floor; office suites on the 4th to 13th floor; a 4 storey commercial podium with retail and reception lobby on the ground floor; large atrium; retail and commercial lettable spaces on the 1st to the 3rd floor and a roof garden and terrace on the 4th floor. Phase 2 includes construction of a 20 storey office tower with retail and reception lobby on the ground floor;
1st to 3rd floor comprising of a large atrium; retail and commercial lettable spaces; office suites only from 4th to 20th floor and  200 parking spaces provision (3 basements).
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Potential Negative Impacts


Recommended Mitigation Measures


Noise and excessive vibration


Machinery, vehicles and equipment to be maintained regularly.


 


Comply with provisions of the noise and excessive vibrations pollution   control regulations for noise levels for permissible noise and vibration levels.


 


Provision of adequate and appropriate Personal Protective Equipment to the workers.


 


Sensitize construction truck drivers to switch off vehicle engines when not in use.


 


Avoid hooting especially when passing through silent zones areas such as schools, churches, residential areas, offices and hospitals.


 


Enclose noisy machines or processes with acoustic screens.


Soil and water pollution


All heavy trucks and any other motorized machinery must be maintained well to avoid oil spills.


 


Equipment and washing activities during construction to be done in designated areas with impervious surface with interceptors for oily waste.


Air pollution (dust, gases)


Wetting exposed soil and site areas with water.


 


Use tarpaulins to cover truck beds hauling soil and debris to and from the site.


 


Use dust screens to cover the buildings under construction to trap dust.


 


Provide appropriate personal protective equipment for employees exposed to dusts and gaseous emissions.


 


Stock piles of earth should be enclosed/watered during windy conditions to reduce dust emission to neighbouring areas.


 


Strict enforcement of onsite speed controls.

 

Increased Solid waste generation


Appropriate budgets for purchase of raw materials to reduce wastage through exposure to weather elements.


 


Solid wastes to be put in a designated area for appropriate disposal.


 


Segregation of waste at source so as to determine the recyclables.


 


Contract a licensed handler to collect waste at regular intervals.


 


Provide skips for wet and dry waste to hold before it is collected.


 


All wastes to be transported by licensed waste handlers by NEMA and to be disposed in licensed disposal sites.


Increased traffic volumes


Construction vehicles will enter and leave the site at controlled points only.


 


Signage will be put in place to give warning and direct the traffic appropriately.


 


Pedestrian walkways to be designated and protected by the placement of temporary barriers.


 


Adhere to onsite traffic By-laws and Kenya Traffic laws.


 


Vehicle checkpoint to be designated inside the property to prevent snarl-up along the general Mathenge drive.


Occupational safety and health hazards


Compliance with all international, national or local health and safety standards that may exist.


 


Issuance of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) enforcing their use.


 


Clear marking of work site hazards and training in recognition of hazard symbols.


 


Regular inspection, testing and maintenance of equipment and machinery.


 


Development and implementation of site emergency response plans.
Training workers on health and safety precautions.
Provide fully stocked first aid kits.
Use of water sprays to arrest dust.
Containment of hazardous materials.
Fencing of the construction site to restrict entry and curb accidents.
Installation of firefighting appliances.
Provision of proper solid waste collection and disposal amenities.
Provision of proper sewerage connections to prevent disease outbreaks.

 

Increased energy demand


The building design to take advantage of natural light during the day.
Service and maintenance of powered machinery regularly to ensure efficiency.
Use energy saving bulbs and appliances where possible.


Increased effluent waste and surface/storm runoff generation


Ensure that sewage pipes are not blocked or damaged so that the effluent can be delivered to the sewer system to avoid land and water contamination.
Install adequate effluent and surface runoff management system.
Ensure that no surface runoff is directed to the sewer system to avoid sewer treatment plant overload.
The contractor’s work camp must have sanitation facilities installed to include a minimum of one latrine and washing area.


Increased water demand


Use of water saving devices (e.g. low volume high pressure cisterns, time delay taps, automatic shut-off taps.
Rain water harvesting to be considered.
Rain water harvesting will be used to supply water for non-portable use.
Put in place measures for quick detection and repair of pipes and tanks leaks.
Borehole water will be used to supplement the piped water supply.


Influx of people


Provide adequate social and other infrastructure to meet needs of the tenants, visitors and customers.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and Regional Development Authorities, N.H.I.F. Building, 12th Floor, Ragati Road, Upper Hill, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8858350         National Environment Management Authority.
 

