
				Page: 2098GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5618
 
MEMBERS OF THE WORKING GROUP ON THE SOCIAL
ECONOMIC AUDIT OF THE CONSTITUTION
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that pursuant to the Resolution made by the National Assembly and dated the 26th February, 2014, establishing the Working Group on the Social Economic Audit of the Constitution, the following have been appointed as members:
Edward Ouko, Auditor-General—(Chairperson);
Members:
Lady Justice Linnet Ndolo
Abdirizak Nunow (Dr.)
Susan Mang'eni
Mwarapayo A.  Wa-Mwachai
Elizabeth Owiti (Dr.)
Erastus Wamugo
Julius Kipng’etich (Dr.)
Joint Secretaries:
Philip Kinisu—(Head of Secretariat)
Milcah Ondiek
Wanjiku Wakogi
The mandate of the Working Group is to—
(a) assess the impact of the implementation of the Constitution to the Nation’s economy and in particular its public finances;
(b) make a rapid assessment of the impact of the implementation of the Constitution on public institutions;
(c)  evaluate the social impact resulting from the implementation of the Constitution;
(d) make recommendations to the National Assembly on potential measures that could better enhance prudent management of the country’s public resources; and
(e)  investigate, determine and advise on any relevant matter  consequential or incidental to the foregoing.
Reporting:
(a)  The Working Group shall work under the Office of the Auditor-General and report to the National Assembly; and
(b) Shall regularly consult, where it deems necessary, the National Assembly through the Budget and Appropriations Committee.
Mode of Operation:
In performance of its mandate, the Working Group shall regulate its own procedure.
Duration:
The duration of the Working Group shall be a period of seven (7) months with effect from publication date of this notice.
Secretariat:
The Secretariat of the Working Group shall be at the Office of the Auditor-General, Anniversary Towers, University way, P.O. Box 30084-00100 Nairobi.
Costs:
The costs incurred by the Working Group, including but not restricted to facilitation and payment of allowance in respect of members and secretaries of the Working Group, shall be defrayed from Voted funds of the Parliamentary Service.
Dated the 11th August, 2014.
EDWARD R.O. OUKO,
Auditor-General.

