
				Page: 2109GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5683
THE COMMISSION FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
QUARTERLY REPORT FOR JULY–SEPTEMBER 2013
MISSION AND VISION OF THE COMMISSION
VISION
A united and prosperous Kenya in which everyone respects, upholds and defends the Constitution.
MISSION
To ensure that policies, laws, structures, systems and administrative procedures developed and applied at all levels are consistent and in accord with the letter and spirit of the Constitution of Kenya.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AG                          Attorney General
APRM                      Africa Peer Review Mechanism
CIC                         Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution
CIOC                       Committee on the Implementation of the Constitution
CRPD                      Conventional of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
CRA                        Commission for Revenue Allocation
EACC                      Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission
IBP                          International Budget Partnership
IEBC                       Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission
MDA                       Ministries, Departments and Agencies
NEPAD                    The New Partnership for Africa’s Development
NLC                        National Land Commission
PPOA                      Public Procurement Oversight Authority
PFM                        Public Finance Management
SRC                         Salaries and Remuneration Commission
TA                          Transition Authority
UNDP                     United Nations Development Programme
UN                          United Nations
FOREWORD
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution is happy to present the quarterly report covering the period July- September 2013 in keeping with our commitment and as required by the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 to publicize status of the its implementation. The preparation and submission of reports is one of the ways in which the Commission communicates to stakeholders and the people of Kenya on the status of implementation of the Constitution, challenges and impediments facing the implementation process and proposals on how to address the challenges and potential impediments. 
The period under review is significant because it was the period in which the National Government is fully constituted with the appointment of principal secretaries and cabinet secretaries. It was also the period in which County governments were allocated funds on the basis of the constitutional division of revenue process. The period also saw the preparation county inaugural budgets that would guide the county development agenda for the year 2013/2014. The county budgeting process unfortunately revealed lack of common vision between the county executive and county assembly, a challenge that calls for a common understanding of goals for counties.
As we move forward with implementation of the Constitution, it is clear that an inadequate level of civic education leaves the people of Kenya without adequate skills to carry out meaningful vigilance on the implementation process. In particular, inadequate civic education severely compromises the role of the people to effectively exercise their sovereign power through   public participation in policy making, legislation and development planning.
A major challenge that the process of implementation faces at this stage, emanates from those state organs that have the greatest obligation to ensure its implementation. A particular concern here is the rather increasing tendency to rush to amendments to the Constitution without giving sufficient thoughts to the issue. Beyond the individual, partisan and group interests, it is not at all clear whether some of the proposed amendments enhance the constitutionalism and promote the interests of the people of Kenya. Such premature amendments of the Constitution bring to mind the many amendments that were effected to the independence Constitution with the net effect of serving the executive and failing the people of Kenya.
While devolution of government is one of the hallmarks of the Constitution of Kenya 2010, county governments are under threat as seen in the various proposals to amend devolution related legislation. The people of Kenya must guard devolution and support the devolved units if their aspirations as espoused in the Constitution are to be realized.
Notwithstanding the challenges, the Commission will continue to work with all Kenyans to refocus our energies to realise a full implementation of the Constitution.
Once again I thank all our stakeholders, CIC staff, UNDP and our development partners for their continued support and dedication.
CHARLES NYACHAE,
Chairperson.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 
This is the progress report by the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution covering the period July – September 2013. The report, as required by the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 {Sections 4(a), 5(6), and 15(2)(d)} and the CIC Act 2010, has highlighted,
(i)         The progress in the implementation of the Constitution;
(ii)        The preparation of the legislation required by the Constitution and any challenges in that regard;
(iii)      The process of establishing new commissions;
(iv)      The process of establishing the infrastructure and systems necessary for the proper operations of county governments;
(v)        Challenges to the process of implementing the Constitution;
 
The Commission has articulated and maintained the position that the review and development of policies are the foundation upon which legislation and administrative procedures should be anchored. During the reporting period, the Commission engaged with various ministries and departments in the review and development of six policies, which are at various levels of development. These include: Kenya Health Policy, Ambulance Policy, Public Participation Policy, Water Policy, Wildlife Conservation and Management Policy, and the Medium Term Plan II (2013- 2017).
The Fifth Schedule to the Constitution identifies 48 Articles of the Constitution that require legislation, and any other legislation required by the Constitution, to be developed within five years of the promulgation of the Constitution. During the reporting period, the Commission worked with the National Executive and other stakeholders to facilitate the review of existing laws and development of new legislation according to the procedure in Article 261(1) and (4) of the Constitution. The laws, which are at different stages of development, are: The Mining Bill, 2013, The Public Service Commission Bill, 2013, and The Basic Education Bill2013. The County Governments (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2013 that seeks to amend the County Governments Act, 2012 to provide for the establishment of County Development Boards in each county was found to violate the letter and spirit of the Constitution; of which the Commission gave a detailed advisory to the National Assembly and the Senate.
Other Bills that were reviewed during the reporting period are Media Council of Kenya Bill, 2013, and Kenya Information and Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2013. CIC raised several concerns on the content of the latter, as it was found to be at variance with the Constitution. The Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychotherapist Bill 2013 and the Psychologists and Counsellors Bill 2013 were found to be different Bills but dealing with the same subject. A technical team was constituted to amalgamate them.
The Marriage Bill 2013, The Matrimonial Property Bill 2013 and The Protection Against Domestic Violence Bill, 2013 were processed in September 2012 and dispatched to the Attorney General for final drafting and submission to the Cabinet. The first two Bills were published in July 2013 and the last Bill is with the Attorney awaiting publication.
The security related Bills that were reviewed during the period are: The National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill, The National Police Service (Amendment) Bill, National Coroner Service Bill, 2013, and the Private Security Regulation Bill, 2013. The latter establishes a Private Security Regulation Authority tasked with the responsibility of regulating, registering and licensing private security services providers. Other Bills that were reviewed are: The Election Campaign Financing Bill, 2013, Water Bill, 2013 and Wildlife Conservation and Management Bill, 2013.
The Commission also received a number of legislative proposals to amend some Acts of Parliament and certain Articles of the Constitution. They include, amendment of the Universities Act, 2012, amendment of the Public Procurement and Disposal Act, 2005 and amendment of the Constituency Development Fund Act, 2013. The Commission found several proposals in the amendment of the Constituency Development Fund Act, 2013 that contravened the provisions of the Constitution. They include negation of the principle of separation of powers among the different arms of government, unclear functional assignment between the Constituency Development Fund Committee and the County Government, etc. The Commission sent an advisory on the same to the National Assembly.
The proposed amendments to Article 260 of the Constitution to delete the offices of Members   of Parliament, Judges & Magistrates and Members of County Assemblies from the list of designated State Offices were found to be so profound that the Commission feels this would fundamentally change many provisions of the Constitution. The Commission issued an advisory detailing the impact of these proposals on the Constitution.
The Kenya Law Reform Commission is facilitating development of County Model Laws on Cultural Activities, Public Entertainment and Public Amenities. The Bills are model laws that will guide county governments in their development of laws to facilitate implementation of their functions as provided in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.
Administrative procedures and institutional frameworks are required to implement the Acts of Parliament or certain provisions thereof. During the reporting period, the Commission engaged the National Police Service Commission and the Ministry of Interior and Coordination of National Government on regulations and other administrative measures required to implement the National Police Service Act, 2011 and the National Police Service Commission Act, 2011. Discussion on regulations under Kenya Defence Forces Act, 2012 led to 12 sets of regulations forwarded to the Attorney-General’s office for publication.
Regulations required to implement the Power of Mercy Act, 2011, National Intelligence Service Act, 2012, National Government Coordination Act, 2013 and National Security Council Act, 2012 are among the regulations that, despite reminders to respective institutions, have not been received by CIC.
The Commission has also been involved in the development and piloting of a change management framework. The framework provides a structured and systematic approach to transforming individuals, groups of people and institutions to entrench a culture of constitutionalism within the institution and in service delivery. The Commission supported Change Management Leadership Orientation for the Board of Directors of Retirement Benefits Authority, University of Nairobi Rapid Results Initiative on Implementation of the Constitution and Integrity, and Change management programme–application of Africa Peer Review Mechanism Governance Tools for Improvement of Governance in Kenya.
The Commission is also finalising a publication of a framework on Public Participation to guide both policy makers and the public on effective implementation and monitoring of national and county programmes and activities.
CIC continues to work with Chapter 15 Constitutional Commissions and the two independent offices in monitoring, overseeing and facilitating the implementation of the Constitution. All the commissions and independent offices envisaged in the Constitution have been established according to the law and are operational except for the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights and the Teachers Service Commission whose members are yet to be appointed. CIC urges the National Executive to expedite the process of appointment of members to these commissions in accordance with the Constitution.
 
CIC developed an engagement mechanism to enhance collaboration amongst the Commissions and the Independent Offices. In August 2013, the Forum of Chairpersons convened the Second Annual Conference to discuss the role of Constitutional Commissions on devolution and good Governance. The forum observed the need for structured engagement with county governments and setting up standards, systems and structures for transparency and accountability to be emulated by other institutions as they fulfil the aspirations of Kenyans. Undermining of some commissions and independent offices by some arms of government and limited allocation of funds were noted as challenges facing them.
To ensure that devolution was on track, CIC made a special focus on both the national and county governments. CIC is also reviewing devolution policies, legislation, and administrative procedures at both levels of government. The Sessional paper on the system of devolved government developed in 2011 is being reviewed to guide implementation of the system of devolved government.
Functional analysis and development of transition implementation plans have lagged behind the anticipated timelines in the Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2012. During the reporting period, the Transitional Authority (TA) reported that it had developed a framework to carry out a functional analysis through which they worked with ministries, departments and state agencies (MDAs) to unbundle the functions. In August 2013, TA issued a legal notice No. 137, which required counties to apply for transfer of functions. During the period, a total of 10 different types of plans were prepared, including County government transition implementation plans, urban areas and cities plans, County development plans, County sectoral plans, and spatial plans. The approval of plans was reported by County Assemblies (CA) as work-in-progress with only one county having approved the County Governments Transition Implementation Plan.
Various consultations on the implementation of the system of devolved government were concluded during the reporting period. The Commission developed and discussed with the Ministry of Health a tool aimed at providing a practical step-by-step guide in analysing, unbundling and costing economic and social rights as provided for in Article 43 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. Kenya health sector forum discussed challenges relating to transfer of functions, with the Commission emphasising that health is a devolved function under the 4th Schedule and should be implemented in accordance with the Constitution.
 
A departmental committee on health consultative meeting noted challenges facing health workers in the new constitutional dispensation and the health sector intergovernmental consultative meeting, bringing together CIC and the County Executive Committee members responsible for Health matters, agreed on a number of subjects. Among the things agreed on is that County Executive Committee members to facilitate the review of the Health Policy and the Health Bill and forward their comments to the Commission by 20th October 2013.
 
CIC held consultations with the Senate focusing on issues of the implementation of the system of devolved government and agreed on several quick action points to be implemented by the senate. These included; development of a framework to guide the implementation of the Senate’s mandate under Article 96 of the Constitution, clarification of the Senate’s mandate on representation of Counties and protection of the interests of the counties and their governments.
 
Perhaps the establishment of the Intergovernmental Consultative Forum is one pointer to challenges facing devolution. The Intergovernmental Relations Act, 2012 (No.2) establishes about six intergovernmental relations structures. So far, it is only the National and County Government Coordinating Summit and Council of Governors that have been established. As required by 13(2) of the Act, the Ministry of Devolution and Planning convened meetings to deliberate on the modalities for establishing sectoral consultative forum to increase consultations and working relationships between the national government and the county governments.
During the reporting period, the Commission issued a number of advisories such as an advisory on the Constitution of Kenya (Amendment) Bill, 2013, advisory on the proposed amendment of the Constituency Development Fund Act, 2013, advisory on the Election Campaign Financing Bill, 2013, etc.
The Commission did not initiate any new cases during the reporting period. However, the Commission continued to pursue other matters pending in court, which are at various stages of consideration.
During the reporting period, the Commission received reports on two studies that it had commissioned; an analysis of reports received from ministries and state agencies since April 2011, and an assessment of progress made towards implementation of the Constitution. The analysis reveals progress in the implementation of the Constitution. About half of the sampled institutions have identified policies to be developed. However, the the analysis revealed irregular and incompleteness of reports from ministries and state agencies.
The implementation of the Constitution continues to face a number of challenges. These include disregard for constitutional procedure for developing and processing Bills, and attempts to defeat the letter and spirit of the Constitution. These include substantive amendment to legislation through the back door under Statute Law (Miscellaneous) Bill, overlooking the state departments in formulating policy and legislative proposals, and proposed amendments to the constitution (Article 260) to have members of parliament, judges & magistrates and members of county assemblies as non-state officers. The consequence of the proposed amendment will occasion additional expenditure of public funds by increasing the wage bill.
PART ONE
INTRODUCTION
1.1. Mandate of the Commission
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (‘the Commission’) is established under Section 5(1) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. The mandate of the Commission is stipulated in Section 4(a), 5(6), and 15(2)(d) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution Act, 2010 and the Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2012. These are:
(a)      Monitor, facilitate and oversee the development of legislation and administrative procedures required to implement the Constitution;
(b)     Co-ordinate with the Attorney-General and the Kenya Law Reform Commission in preparing for tabling in Parliament, the legislation required to implement the Constitution;
(c)      Report every three (3) months to the Constitutional Implementation Oversight Committee on:
(i)         Progress in the implementation of the Constitution;
(ii)       The preparation of the legislation required by the Constitution and any challenges in that regard;
(iii)      The process of establishing new commissions;
(iv)      The process of establishing the infrastructure necessary for the proper operations of each county including progress on locating offices, assemblies and establishment and transfer of staff;
(v)       Any impediments to the process of implementing the Constitution;
 
(d)     Work with each Constitutional Commission to ensure that the letter and spirit of the Constitution is respected;
(e)      Exercise such other functions as are provided for by the Constitution or any other written law, and;
(f)      Monitor and oversee the transition process to devolved government and ensure that the system of devolved government is implemented effectively.
The Commission is further obligated to meet the objects of Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices as set out in Article 249 (1) of the Constitution, which are:
(a)      Protecting the sovereignty of the people;
(b)     Securing the observance by all State organs of democratic values and principles; and
(c)      Promoting constitutionalism.
In discharging its mandate, the Commission is obliged to observe, promote, respect and protect national values and principles of governance as stipulated in Article 10 of the Constitution.
This report is prepared and submitted pursuant to the reporting requirement of the Commission stipulated in Sections 4(a), 4(d) and 25(1) of the CIC Act.
1.2. Organization of the Report
This report is divided into Eight Parts and Seven Annexes. Part One summarizes the Commission’s mandate. Part Two provides an analysis of the Commission’s achievements during the reporting period under the subheadings of policies, legislation and administrative procedures that were reviewed. Achievements are not restricted to this part of the report but are discussed throughout the report.
Part Three presents discussions on establishment and operationalization of constitutional commissions and independent offices, and CIC engagement with them to ensure that the letter and spirit of the constitution is respected. This part of the report also discusses challenges faced by these commissions. Part Four focuses on the System of Devolved Government. It highlights the work of CIC on devolution and engagement with various stakeholders to ensure effective implementation of the devolved system of government. A section has been devoted to highlight challenges facing devolution.
Part Five is a summary of CIC activities in promoting constitutionalism and protecting the sovereignty of the people. These include media statements and advisories, stakeholder engagements, forums, and judicial interventions by the Commission.
Part Six presents a summary of two studies carried out by the Commission: Analysis of reports from government ministries, departments and state agencies on the implementation of the Constitution, and Assessment of Status of Constitution Implementation. Part Seven presents the challenges, impediments and recommendations. Part Eight summarises activities planned for the period October-December, 2013. Finally, the report has seven annexes.
PART TWO
ACHIEVEMENTS
This Part of the report addresses three main areas: review and development of policies, review and development of legislation and review and development of administrative procedures.
2.1 Review and Development of Policies
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution has articulated and maintained the position that review and development of policies are the foundation upon which legislation and administrative procedures should be anchored. It is the responsibility of government executives to initiate the development of policies. In addition, the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution specifies a number of policies that the National government is expected to develop. During the reporting period, the Commission engaged with various ministries and departments in the review and development of six policies, which are at various levels of development as discussed below.  
(1)         Kenya Health Policy 2012
The Kenya Health Policy 2012–2030 seeks to give direction on improvement in the overall status of health in Kenya in line with the Constitution, global commitments and the Vision 2030. The Commission received the draft Policy from the Ministry of Health and circulated it to county governments for input since delivery of health services is a county government function under the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.
CIC is currently receiving comments from county governments and reviewing them for inclusion in the policy. CIC will convene a stakeholder consultative forum to finalize the review of the final policy before engaging the Ministry of Health for finalization of the policy. 
(2)         Ambulance Policy
 
The Ministry of Health has developed a Concept Paper and Draft Policy on Ambulance Services in Kenya. The Policy, which has been submitted to CIC for review, seeks to reduce time laps between injury and medical attention. It is also intended to reduce the complications and deaths by ensuring provision of high quality primary (pre-hospital) curative care.
The ambulance services are a function of the county governments. The Commission is therefore reviewing the Concept Paper to ensure compliance with the letter and spirit of the Constitution. CIC will further engage with the Nurses Organization and other stakeholders on the review of the Concept Paper on the Ambulance Policy.
 
(3)         Public Participation Policy 
During the reporting period, the Commission received a concept paper on Public Participation Policy from the Department of Justice under the Office of the Attorney General. This is as a result of a stakeholder forum organised by CIC in September 2012, in which it was agreed that the then Ministry of Justice, National Cohesion and Constitutional Affairs would facilitate the development of a Policy on Public Participation. The concept paper sets out guidelines for the development of a Policy that will provide for mechanisms for citizens to participate meaningfully in the affairs of national and county governments. The policy will also clarify the roles and responsibilities of the two levels of government, non-state actors and the public.
The Commission reviewed the concept paper internally and circulated it to members of a steering committee of stakeholders for comments. The recommendations were consolidated and CIC will engage with the Office of the Attorney General and the Department of Justice to discuss the recommendations with a view to finalizing the Policy. 
(4)     Water Policy
 
The Commission received the Water Policy from the Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources. A number of constitutional issues requiring alignment with the Constitution were identified. The Commission is reviewing them to ensure compliance with the letter and spirit of the Constitution.
(5)     Wildlife Conservation and Management Policy
 
The Commission received the Wildlife Conservation Management Policy from the Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife. The Policy is currently undergoing internal review. CIC will conduct stakeholder meetings to ensure public participation in finalising the policy.
(6)     Medium Term Plan II (2013- 2017) 
 
During the reporting period, the Commission participated in the finalisation of the Medium Term Plan II (2013 – 2017) and its related monitoring and evaluation framework. The Commission’s recommendations were focused on:
Mainstreaming a citizen-centered and values driven approach across all pillars
Identifying Constitution implementation issues that should inform the policy, legal and institutional reforms
Flagging areas of concern with regards to the implementation of the MTP II in the context of a system of devolved government. 
2.2 Review and Development of Legislation
The Fifth Schedule to the Constitution identifies 48 Articles of the Constitution that require legislation to implement the Constitution within a period of five years from the promulgation of the Constitution. The Schedule also provides for “Any other legislation required by the Constitution”, though not specifically under any Article of the Constitution, to be developed within five years of promulgation of the Constitution. Further, Section 7(1) of Fifth Schedule provides that “All laws in force immediately before the effective date continues in force and shall be construed with the alterations, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions necessary to bring it into conformity with this Constitution”. This provision calls for an audit for compliance with the Constitution, of all laws existing before the effective date.
The Commission thus, continued to work with the National Executive and other stakeholders to facilitate the review of existing laws and development of new legislation according to the procedure in Article 261(1) and (4) of the Constitution. During the reporting period, the following laws, at different stages of finalisation, were reviewed for alignment with the Constitution.
(1)        Mining Bill, 2013
 
The Commission finalized the review of the Mining Bill, 2013 and submitted it to the Attorney General. The Bill is intended to regulate the mining industry, which has enormous potential for development of the country. In reviewing the Bill, the Commission engaged with different stakeholders to address issues of concern before it was finalised.  CIC also made a presentation giving a summary of the Mining Bill, 2013 to the National Assembly Departmental Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. 
(2)        Public Service Commission Bill, 2013
 
In July 2013 the Public Service Commission convened a consultative meeting to discuss the regulations that had been developed under the Public Service Commission Act, 2012. CIC observed that the regulations contained matters of principle and policy, which should be anchored in substantive legislation. There was also a gap in the Public Service Commission Act as it did not have enabling provisions on which the regulations could be anchored. 
The Public Service Commission thereafter reviewed the Public Service Commission Act, 2012 and forwarded the proposed amendments to CIC. The Bill is intended to repeal the Public Service Commission Act, 2012 and provide for the establishment of the Public Service Commission with the functions and powers as contemplated in Article 234. CIC will finalise the review in the next quarter.
(3)        Basic Education Act 2013
 
The Commission undertook a review of the Basic Education Act 2013 to ensure that the rights and special needs of learners with disabilities are incorporated in the Act in accordance with the requirements of Article 54(1) (b) of the Constitution. This followed a consultative process with state and non- state actors to review a concept note on mainstreaming disability rights in all aspects of society. The Concept note guided the development of legislative proposals for the review of the Basic Education Act, 2013.
A stakeholder meeting held to review the Basic Education Act, 2013 recommended that the scope of the review be expanded to cover relevant constitutional provisions in addition to the inclusion of rights of learners with disabilities. In the course of reviewing the Act, CIC received a legislative proposed amendment on the Bill from the National Assembly. The Commission reviewed the legislative proposals and forwarded its recommendations to the National Assembly in an advisory dated 16th August 2013. CIC also learned that various stakeholders were reviewing the Act to address various conflicting provisions. The scope of the review was therefore expanded to address proposals received from other stakeholders.  The review of the Basic Education Act, 2013 is still on going.
(4)        The County Governments (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2013
 
The Amendment Bill, which was published on 7th August 2013, seeks to amend the County Governments Act, 2012 by inserting a new section to provide for the establishment of County Development Boards in each county. CIC reviewed the Bill and found that, the proposed amendment Act violates the letter and spirit of the Constitution.  The Commission gave a detailed advisory to the National Assembly and the Senate on the proposed amendment, which in summary indicates that the proposed amendment;
(a)    Contravenes the principle of separation of powers between the legislative and the executive arms of both the national and county government;
(b)   Contravenes the principle of public participation;
(c)    Duplicates functions of existing intergovernmental consultative forums;
(d)   Contravenes provisions on county planning and budgeting process;
(e)    Has the potential of impacting negatively on the wage bill.
 
CIC will seek to meet the relevant Senate Committee dealing with the matter to ensure that any offending provisions are deleted.
 
(5)        Media Council of Kenya Bill, 2013
 
CIC reviewed the Media Council of Kenya Bill, 2013, one of the laws to be enacted by 27thAugust, 2013, and submitted the Bill to the Attorney General on 9th July, 2013. Further to the submission of the Bill, stakeholders in the media sector raised several issues to be addressed. A stakeholder meeting was held on 16th July 2013 between the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology, media practitioners and CIC to resolve outstanding issues arising from draft Media Council of Kenya Bill 2013. The meeting identified and recommended various amendments to the Bill which was further reviewed by CIC and resubmitted to the AG’s office and published on 22nd July, 2013. It had not been enacted by September.
(6)        Kenya Information and Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2013
 
The Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology established a technical working group to review and align the ICT Sector Policy and legislative framework to Article 34 of the Constitution. The Working Group drew membership from relevant government agencies and stakeholders in the ICT sector. 
The working group developed a draft Sector Policy and Kenya Information and Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2013. These were reviewed by CIC, and submitted to the AG on 16th July 2013 as “Kenya Information and Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2013’, for publication and subsequent tabling in parliament. The Bill was published on 22ndJuly, 2013. CIC has raised several concerns on the content of the published Bill, which the Commission is of the view that are at variance with the Constitution.
(7)        Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychotherapist Bill 2013
 
In June 2013, CIC was invited by the National Assembly Departmental Committee on Health to participate at a pre-publication scrutiny meeting, on the proposed Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychotherapist Bill 2013. The Bill, sponsored by a private member proposes to provide for the training, registration, licensing, practice and standards of Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychotherapists as well as establish a Public Body (Board) to administer the law once enacted.
The Commission facilitated a stakeholders meeting on 16th July 2013. In the meeting, the Commission was informed of the existence of another Bill, the Psychologists and Counsellors Bill 2013, sponsored by the then Ministry of State for Public Service. Since the two separate Bills deal with the same subject, the stakeholders agreed on the following:
(a)     The need to amalgamate the Bills to ensure enactment of a comprehensive law that incorporates the concerns of the implementers within the sector. A technical team comprising representatives from the targeted ministries, universities and the professional bodies was proposed to undertake the task. The amalgamated Bill will be subjected to a further and final stakeholder forum before enactment.
(b)    The Bill should set standards to be used to regulate the profession so that consumers of the services of counsellors, psychologists and psychotherapists are protected in line with Article 46 of the Constitution.
(c)     The need for clarity with regards to which ministry the Bill will be anchored. One of the Bills anchored the Bill to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to Health, while the other anchored it to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to Public Service.
(d)    In view of the fact that the Bills seek to establish institutions that will be funded using public funds, there should be clarity on the procedures that the National Assembly have put in place to guide the processing of Money Bills as provided in Article 114 of the Constitution. 
(e)     Kenya Association of Professional Counsellors requests the member sponsoring the Bill to put on hold its processing, to allow for the amalgamation of the Bills.
A technical team has since been constituted to consolidate the Bills and CIC will continue to monitor progress on the amalgamation process, following which the amalgamated Bill will be subjected to CIC review and a final stakeholder forum before its finalization.
 
(8)        Family Law Bills: Marriage Bill 2013; Matrimonial Property Bill 2013 and Protection Against Domestic Violence Bill, 2013
 
In September 2012, the Commission processed and forwarded the Family Law Bills to the Attorney General for final drafting and publication. However, due to the winding up of the 10th Parliament, the Marriage Bill 2013 and Matrimonial Property Bill 2013 were both published on 5th July 2013, and are awaiting parliamentary debate. The Protection Against Domestic Violence Bill is still with the Attorney General awaiting publication. During the month of August 2013, the Commission was invited by the Justice and Legal Affairs Departmental Committee of the National Assembly to give comments on the Bills. CIC audited the published Bills and prepared a consolidated report on the reasoning behind some of the contentious issues that arose during the CIC-led stakeholder consultations and which continue to elicit debate to date. It is expected that the CIC report will assist the Departmental Committee to appreciate the content of the Bills. The Commission will continue to monitor parliamentary discussions relating to the Bills.
(9)        Private Security Regulation Bill, 2013
 
During the reporting period CIC held consultative stakeholder meetings with key state security organs and the national executive to discuss and finalise the review of the Private Security Regulation Bill, 2013. Amongst other pertinent private security industry matters, the Bill seeks to establish a Private Security Regulation Authority. The Authority is tasked with the responsibility of regulating, registering and licensing private security service providers. The Bill further provides for the cooperation of the Private Security industry with national security organs.
Key stakeholders involved in the process were the National Police Service (including, the Administration Police Service, Kenya Police Service and the Directorate of Criminal Investigations, the Ministry of Interior and Coordination of National Government, the Kenya Law Reform Commission and the Office of the Attorney-General. The Bill was forwarded to the Attorney-General’s Office for finalization and tabling in Parliament.
(10)     National Coroner Service Bill, 2013
 
CIC held several consultative stakeholder meetings with key state security organs and the national executive to finalise the review of the National Coroner Service Bill, 2013. The Bill establishes a National Coroner Service that is tasked with the responsibility of investigating sudden deaths, establishing their causes and advising the National Police Service, Directorate of Public Prosecution and the State in general on the causes of those deaths. The Bill was submitted to the Office of the Attorney-General for finalization and submission to Parliament.
 
The institutions involved in the process of formulation of this Bill were the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Interior and Coordination of National Government, National Police Service, Kenya Law Reform Commission and the Office of the Attorney-General.
(11)     The National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill and The National Police Service (Amendment) Bill
 
CIC received the National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill and National Police Service (Amendment) Bill, which were reviewed, finalized and submitted to the Attorney-General during the month of July 2013. The Commission consulted various stakeholders in the course of reviewing Bills. The Bills were published and tabled before Parliament for debate.
The Commission appeared before National Assembly Committee on Security and Foreign relations to discuss the Bills. During the meeting, the Commission emphasized the necessity to respect and uphold provisions in Articles 245 and 246 of the Constitution. The Bills were published on 16th July 2013. CIC is following the process in Parliament to ensure that the letter and spirit of the Constitution is upheld.
(12)     The Election Campaign Financing Bill, 2013
 
The Election Campaign Financing Bill, 2013 seeks to regulate the amount of money that may be spent by or on behalf of a candidate or party in respect of any election. The Bill provides for the regulation, management, expenditure and accountability of election campaign funds during election and referendum campaigns. Having been published on 5th July 2013, the Commission reviewed the Bill to ensure constitutionality, technical soundness and conformity with other legislation. The Commission subsequently wrote an advisory to the National Assembly and the Senate with recommendations on the provisions of the Bill on 14th August 2013.
(13)     Water Bill, 2013
 
CIC received the Water Bill from the Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources and identified a number of issues requiring alignment with the Constitution. CIC is currently reviewing the Bill and plans to conduct stakeholder meetings and public participation session to enrich the Bill. .
(14)     Wildlife Conservation and Management Bill, 2013
 
CIC received the Wildlife Conservation Management Bill, 2013 from the Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife. CIC is reviewing the Bill to ensure compliance with the letter and the spirit of the Constitution, and will conduct stakeholder meetings to incorporate stakeholder views before finalisation.
(15)     Legislative Proposal for the Amendment of the Universities Act, 2012
CIC received a legislative proposal from the National Assembly, seeking to amend the Universities Act, 2013 to make provision for a number of issues not addressed in the Act including:
(i)          Additional membership to the Kenya Universities and Colleges Central Placement Board
(ii)         Compelling a university or college to admit students to its programmes independently with the approval of the Kenya Universities and Colleges Central Placement Board
(iii)       Provide for the rights of applicants to the Kenya Universities and Colleges Central Placement Board
The Commission reviewed the legislative proposal and forwarded its recommendations to the National Assembly in an advisory dated 16th August 2013. Although proposal was reviewed, CIC is of the opinion that there is need for a more comprehensive review of the Act to align it with the Constitution.
(16)     Legislative Proposal for the Amendment of the Constituency Development Fund Act, 2013
CIC reviewed the legislative proposal to amend the Constituency Development Fund (CDF) Act, 2013, and forwarded its recommendations to the National Assembly. The recommendations were:
(i)         Any amendment to the CDF Act, 2013 should clarify that the Constituency Development Fund is a charge of the revenue allocated to the National Government;
(ii)        While amending the Act, there should be clear functional assignment between the Constituency Development Fund Committee, which is an entity of the national government, and the County Government, such that the CDF Committee which is not allocated functions under the domain of a County Executive.
(iii)      There should be clear functional assignment between the Constituency Development Fund Committee, which is an entity of the national government, and the County Government, such that the CDF Committee is not allocated functions under the domain of a County Executive.
(iv)      To ensure continuity of projects, the term of office of the Constituency Development Fund Committee should not be subjected to the term of office of the Member of the National Assembly.
(v)        The costs of administration of the CDF Board, inclusive of the costs incurred in staff employment, should be capped at a defined percentage of the total allocation of the Constituency Development Fund. This will ensure the use of funds in the development projects for which they are intended, as opposed to possible over-expenditure on administrative costs.
In August 2013, CIC met the relevant Parliamentary Committee and expressed the above concerns.
(17)     Legislative Proposal for the Amendment of the Public Procurement and Disposal Act, 2005 
CIC reviewed the legislative proposal by the National Assembly to amend the Public Procurement and Disposal Act, 2005, by making provisions for ensuring that at least twenty five percent of annual procurement by public entities is allocated to the youth in accordance with such conditions as the Cabinet Secretary may prescribe. CIC was in agreement with the proposed amendments, which were in line with the letter and spirit of the Constitution and informed the relevant Parliamentary Committee of its position.
(18)     Development of County Model Laws on Cultural Activities, Public Entertainment and Public Amenities
 
CIC participated in the development of county model laws on Cultural Activities, Public Entertainment and Public Amenities during a meeting organized by the Kenya Law Reform Commission (KLRC). The Bills are model laws that will guide county governments in development of laws to facilitate implementation of their functions as provided in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. 
2.3 Development of Administrative Procedures and Institutional Structures
(1)    Engagement with County Assemblies
The Constitution of Kenya 2010 requires county governments to develop structures and systems necessary for the smooth implementation of the Constitution. These frameworks will also ensure protection of the sovereignty of the people, the observance by all state organs of democratic values and principles and promotion of constitutionalism.
CIC developed a template to be used by each County Assembly to report on their performance in each quarter. The tool captures data in five (5) key areas; membership, legislative role, approval role, oversight role and representation of the people, as required by the Constitution and enhanced further by the various statutes on the system of devolved government. As a result, reports were received and analysed from 34 out of 47 County Assemblies. The results, contained in a report available in CIC, its website (www.cickenya.org) and shared with the County Assemblies, indicate overall efforts to comply with the provisions of the Constitution.
(2)    Development of a Public Participation Document
As a follow up to a stakeholder forum on the development of a framework/policy on public participation held in July 2013, the Commission organised a paper writers’ meeting on 8th August 2013. The meeting agreed that;
(a)    The paper writers would submit a 500 words abstract. The steering committee would subsequently review the abstracts and give feedback to the writers.
(b)   Thereafter, paper writers would submit their respective chapters for further review, and feedback for finalization.
(c)    The report would be consolidated, edited and finalized by mid October 2013
 
The publication will guide policy makers and the public on effective implementation and monitoring of public participation principle. 
(3)    Regulations Under the National Police Service Act, 2011 and National Police Service Commission Act, 2011 
The Commission held consultative meetings with the National Police Service Commission and the Ministry of Interior and Coordination of National Government, to discuss regulations and other administrative measures required to implement the National Police Service Act, 2011 and the National Police Service Commission Act, 2011. These organs prioritized various administrative measures for formulation and set clear timelines within which period they would be submitted to CIC.
(4)    Regulations Under the Kenya Defence Forces Act 2012 Regulations
The Commission held meetings with the Kenya Defence Forces to discuss and finalize the Kenya Defence Forces Act, 2012 regulations. The 12 sets of regulations were forwarded to the Attorney-General’s office for publication.
(5)    Regulations Under the Power of Mercy Act, 2011 
CIC wrote to the Attorney-General, National Intelligence Service, Ministry of Interior and the Office of the President requesting for submission of Regulations required to implement the Power of Mercy Act, 2011, National Intelligence Service Act, 2012, National Government Coordination Act, 2013 and National Security Council Act, 2012.
The Commission further sought from the Ministry of Interior and National Government Coordination with regard to the formulation of various policies required under the Constitution and Statutes that the Ministry administers. Reminders were sent to State organs and departments under their ambit of the necessity to submit quarterly reports on status of implementation of the Constitution.
(6)    Development and Piloting of a Change Management Framework 
The Constitution of Kenya 2010 is a transformational document whose implementation demands a fundamental and sustainable change in governance. There is need to transform public service: systems, structures, service delivery mechanisms, human resource management and performance management frameworks. Lessons learnt three years after the promulgation of the Constitution and from Kenya’s own reform journey and international best practice indicate that key to the realization of the desired change is the Public Service mind-set, i.e., the attitudes, beliefs and culture as well as underlying institutional structures for Public Service delivery.
As such, the Commission is working with state actors to realise the letter and spirit of the Constitution in line with provisions of Article 249 (1) of the Constitution specifically: “ (b) securing the observance by all State organs of democratic values and principles; and (c) promoting constitutionalism. During this reporting period, achievements in this regard were centred on the development and piloting of a change management framework. This framework provides a structured and systematic approach to transforming individuals, groups of people and institutions with the aim of entrenching a culture of constitutionalism within the institution and in service delivery.
The framework identifies the following key steps:
(i)        Appreciation of the Constitution of Kenya as a change driver for the state organ
(ii)       Defining the desired state.
(iii)     Environmental and internal scanning to enhance appreciation of the context for change
(iv)     Development of an action plan that concretely and logically identifies a sequence of activities and responsible actors to act as an implementation road map
(v)       Managing the transition – working with change champions
(vi)     Proactively addressing risk
Against this background, change management activities undertaken during this period centred on support to three state agencies (discussed below) to initiate and/or enhance their change management initiatives as part of a demand driven pilot programme, which is envisioned to be scaled up.  Highlighted below are the specific programmes conducted:
(a)Change Management Leadership Orientation for the Board of Directors of Retirement Benefits Authority.
CIC facilitated a leadership orientation session with the board of directors aimed at securing ownership and buy-in for the change management process following a constitutional compliance audit undertaken by the Authority. During the leadership orientation session the commission facilitated the board members to:
Enrich their understanding and application of the Constitution of Kenya to ensure that the letter and the spirit of the Constitution is respected.
Identify key issues concerning the retirement benefit subsector and RBA to be included in the change management strategy
Map the way forward for the development and implementation of a comprehensive change management strategy for constitutional compliance.
At the end of the orientation session, it was agreed that the Commission would assist the governance structure established to spearhead the development of a change management strategy. The initial request was the cascading of the sensitisation session to staff members and support to the Authority to develop change champions.
(b) University of Nairobi – Rapid Results Initiative (RRI) on Implementation of the Constitution and Integrity:
The Commission supported the University of Nairobi to launch and roll out a Rapid Results Initiative (RRI) on the implementation of the Constitution and Integrity. The Rapid Results Approach is a results-based management methodology whose 100-day initiatives are used to jump start major organisational change. Utilisation of the RRI serves both as a diagnostic and implementation tool, identifying as well as addressing the change issues in an organisation. The University RRI sought to increase the level of awareness of the Constitution across the University of Nairobi. The sensitization of all members of the University, ranging from Senate and University Council to the entire student fraternity covered the provisions of the Constitution of Kenya 2010 and their role in the realization of its letter and spirit. By September 2013, the University Senate, University Council, University Management Board, University Administration Staff, University Alumni Association members, University Pension Scheme staff and members, and the University Student Leadership (SONU) had been sensitized on the Constitution. Information on the Constitution and the role of institutions of higher learning in the implementation of the Constitution was disseminated through various media channels including TV, radio and print.
(c) Application of APRM Governance Tools for Improvement of Governance in Kenya: 
The Commission embarked on supporting the Ministry of Devolution and Planning through the NEPAD/APRM Kenya Secretariat to develop a broad based governance programme to facilitate change management. This programme is anchored on two pillars, implementation of the Constitution and the realisation of Kenya’s development blue print, the Kenya Vision 2030. Utilising four internationally recognised governance barometers, the Commission is supporting the Secretariat to identify from a Constitution implementation perspective, findings and recommendations that can inform the national governance reform agenda.
Specific contributions by CIC were:
Enhancing appreciation of methodology, findings and recommendations of the selected governance indices; 
An initial review of emerging continental and Kenya best practices to identify specific issues to reshape Kenya’s governance reform agenda for, among other things, implementation of the Constitution; and
Identification of any emerging gaps. 
It is envisioned that the Commission’s, continued support to this initiative will contribute towards the deepening of democratic practices as the Government reflects on the progress realized, international and continental best practices identified as well as deficiencies noted in governance and socio-economic development.
PART THREE
STATUS OF ESTABLISHING CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS
Chapter 15 of the Constitution establishes ten independent commissions[1] and two independent offices; the Auditor-General and the Controller of Budget. The Human Rights and Equality Commission was restructured into three commissions, namely: the National Gender and Equality Commission, the National Commission on Administrative Justice and the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights. Article 79 of the Constitution also establishes Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission with status and powers of a commission under Chapter 15.
The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution establishes the Commission for Implementation of the Constitution with specific mandates, and to which Articles 248 to 254 of the Constitution apply. Section 4(c) of the CIC Act requires the Commission to work with each constitutional Commission to ensure that the letter and the spirit of the Constitution is respected. 
 
It is on the basis of the above provisions, and generally its mandate that CIC works with all the constitutional commissions and independent offices in monitoring, overseeing and facilitating the implementation of the Constitution, including the process of establishing these commissions.
 
This section highlights the status of establishment and discusses the engagements CIC had with constitutional commissions and two independent offices during the reporting period, highlighting achievements and challenges facing the commissions.
 
All the commissions and independent offices envisaged in the Constitution have been established according to the law and are operational except the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights and Teachers Service Commission.
 
As stated in previous quarterly reports, members to serve in the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights and Teachers Service Commission are yet to be appointed. In the case of the Teachers Service Commission, following the rejection of some presidential nominees to in January 2013, the President submitted another list of nominees to the National Assembly for approval in September 2013. The names included some of those who were rejected by the national assembly.
 
In regards to the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights, the court issued judgement in the case on ethnic representation to the Commission. The National Executive should now expedite the process of appointment of members to the Commission.
 
3.1 Annual Conference For Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices
The forum of chairpersons of constitutional commissions and independent offices convened the second annual conference for constitutional commissions and independent offices, whose theme was ‘Devolution and Good Governance: The Role of Constitutional Commissions’. The main objectives of the conference were to: -
 Examine and analyze the extent to which the Constitutional Commissions have played their oversight role;
Create a platform for information sharing and benchmarking on the operations of Constitutional and Statutory oversight institutions;
Provide an opportunity for introspect and reconfiguration of the role and place of Constitutional and Statutory oversight institutions in Kenya’s governance structure and process and enhancing collaboration; and
Networking among Constitutional and Statutory oversight institutions and with other State Organs
The secretariat and the technical teams of the Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices agreed to work together. As a result of this, the CEOs/Secretaries held their first meeting in September 2013 and adopted Terms of Reference to be used in the coordination of Secretariats’ activities.
The leadership arm of the Chairperson’s forum is rotational. Elections were held during the conference and Mr. Charles Nyachae, the CIC chairperson, was elected the chairperson of the Forum.
The meeting observed that: -
(a)      There was need for structured engagement with county governments and coordinated visits to the counties to facilitate, monitor and oversee the implementation of the System of Devolved Government.
(b)     The commissions and independent officers should set up standards, systems and structures for transparency and accountability to be emulated by other institutions and ensure that these institutions remain relevant to the aspirations of Kenyans.
It was also noted that while the implementation of the Constitution was on course, there were a number of challenges faced by commissions and independent offices. These included:-
(a)      Independence of the Commissions: Undermining of some of the commissions and independent offices by other arms of the government. For instance the delay in establishment of National Land Commission (NLC) and allocation of inadequate funds to commissions and independent offices thus making it hard for the institutions to operate.
(b)     Untimely transfer of functions: The political pressure to transfer all functions to County Governments without regard to the county preparedness in taking up of the functions. It was noted that the letter and spirit of the constitution in relation to transfer of functions must be the guiding principle.
3.2 Mechanisms of Working with Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices to Promote Constitutionalism 
One of the mandates of CIC is to work with each constitutional commission to ensure that the letter and spirit of this Constitution is respected. In this regard, CIC convened two meetings for Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices. The first meeting, (2nd July 2013) discussed and adopted CIC’s Concept Paper on working with constitutional commissions and independent offices, and the second one (8th August 2013) focused on developing work-plans, terms of reference and working modalities towards the realization of the concept note. The main objective of the joint initiative is to increase institutional compliance amongst state actors, citizens and non-state actors with a focus on public participation.
The meeting agreed that there was need to enhance appreciation of the respective mandates as well as opportunities for working together by convening joint forums for Chairperson’s, Commissioners and Secretariat and collaborating in activities by: -
(a)      Prioritizing and fast tracking the development of any policies, legislation, administrative procedures and institutional frameworks identified jointly;
(b)     Monitoring legislation process through an online tracker;
(c)      Developing joint publications as appropriate;
(d)     County engagement;
(e)      Benchmarking; and
(f)      Civic education.
It was also agreed that CIC should convene a technical committee meeting to harness existing structures and also establish additional appropriate ones with the aim of: 
(a)      Developing a shared strategic focus;
(b)     Deepening the levels of engagement between the Commissioners and Secretariat to consider setting up other relevant standing committees;
(c)      Defining performance accountability issues; and furthering joint stakeholder engagement.
PART FOUR
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SYSTEM OF DEVOLVED GOVERNMENT
The Constitution, under section 15(2) (d) of Sixth Schedule, mandates CIC to monitor the implementation of the system of devolved government, including monitoring the operationalization of the constitutional provisions on devolved government as provided for in Chapter Eleven of the Constitution. This also includes the review and development of policies, legislation and administrative procedures required to implement the system of devolved government. In pursuit of this mandate, the Commission has embarked on establishing a mechanism to keep track and report on progress and challenges in the implementation of the system of devolved government.
During the reporting period, CIC undertook several activities to ensure that the implementation of the system of devolved government was on track and complying with the letter and spirit of the Constitution. These involved review of devolution policies, operationalization of the legislation and administrative procedures.
The Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2012 identifies two phases of transition with specific activities; phase one covering up to March 4th general elections, and phase two starting after the general election. The Fourth Schedule to the Constitution distributes functions between the national and county governments. The Commission uses the 4th Schedule and other relevant provisions of the Constitution as a foundation for monitoring progress made in transition to the system of devolved government. 
4.1  Review and Development of Policies
The Sessional paper on the system of devolved government, developed in 2011 is an overarching policy document that seeks to outline the policy framework for devolution in Kenya.  The Sessional paper proposes mechanism for the implementation of the system of devolved government as provided for in the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. Following the substantive progress so far made in transition, the Ministry of Devolution and Planning has initiated the review of the paper. The proposed review focuses on developing a policy document that critically takes into cognisance the prevailing environment and provide guidance towards effective implementation of a system of devolved government.
CIC participated in a technical retreat organized by the Ministry of Devolution and planning that reviewed the sessional paper. It was agreed at the meeting that the development of the devolution policy will be subjected to national values and principles as envisaged Article 10 of the Constitution.
4.2     Review and Development of Legislation at the National Government 
Development of devolution related legislation during this reporting period, aimed at effecting amendments to the devolution laws of parliament, including the County Government (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, and the Constituency Development Fund Act, 2012. CIC closely followed the actions on the various Amendments Bills and issued advisories as detailed in Annex 2, and shared with the Senate other proposed amendments on devolution Acts (Annex 3), aimed at enabling the effective operationalization of devolution Acts.
The Commission expressed concern over the procedure used in the amendments and enactment of devolution related legislation thus violating Article 261(4) of the Constitution. The article requires that the Attorney General should, in consultation with CIC, prepare Bills for tabling in Parliament. Additionally, Section 14(1) and (2) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution requires that any Bill relating to devolved government be enacted only after CIC and the Commission on Revenue Allocation are consulted, and given at least thirty days to consider such legislation and any recommendations of the two Commissions are considered by Parliament.
 
Article 185 of the Constitution provides for the legislative authority of County Assemblies.  County assemblies are expected to make laws that are necessary for or incidental to, the effective performance of the functions and exercise of the powers of the county government under the Fourth Schedule. Subsequently with the transfer of functions to county governments, the assemblies have commenced the process of enacting necessary laws.
 
During the reporting period, 34 County Assemblies submitted reports to CIC indicating that they had passed some laws and/or had Bills being processed. A total of 59 Bills from the 34 County Assemblies were reported as processed with 32% of them being gazetted. Appropriation Bills and Supplementary Appropriation Bills formed 74% of the total Bills. Only a few counties worked on other Bills.  Section 4.7 further discusses the findings in the report.
 
4.3  Functional Analysis and Development of Transition Implementation Plans
(i)                 Unbundling, Costing and Transfer of Functions
The Constitution provides for phased and asymmetrical transfer of devolved functions. Prior to this, a functional analysis, which is the responsibility of the Transition Authority as stipulated in section 7 of the Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2012, needed to be carried out. The Fourth schedule to the Constitution assigns functions to the national and county governments. The functions are either exclusive to a level of government, concurrent between the two levels of government or residual functions whose responsibility to deliver is with the national government. The functions under the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution are broadly provided for and hence the need for careful analysis to clarify which level of government has specific service delivery responsibilities. 
 
During the reporting period, TA reported that it had developed a framework to carry out a functional analysis in which they worked with MDAs to unbundle the functions. This process is reported to be on-going. In August 2013, TA issued a legal notice No. 137, which required counties to apply for transfer of functions and engaged a consultant to undertake costing of functions. During the reporting period, a number of functions were devolved to the county government among them delivery of health services. However, the Kenya Medical Practitioners Pharmacists and Dentist Union, the Kenya National Union of Nurses and the Kenya Health Professional Society moved to court to prohibit TA from enforcing the legal notice on the ground that the legal notice was published without following the Constitution, the Transition to Devolved Government Act, and the County Governments Act. This matter is still in court.
(ii)               Assets and Liabilities
The Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2012 mandates TA to prepare and validate an inventory of all existing assets and liabilities of government, other public entities and local authorities for determination and recommendation on the sharing of assets between the national and county governments. Pursuant to legal notice No. 45 of 2013 an inter-agency technical committee on transfer of assets and liabilities was created. TA’s report on transfer of assets and liabilities indicated that an inventory of government net assets and liabilities for 192 MDAs was prepared while data in 227 MDAs had not been collected. In addition, TA procured and installed an asset management information system. However, the process of validating the inventory is yet to be completed.
(iii)              Transition Implementation Plans
The Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2012 (section 16) require TA to issue guidelines to state organs or public entities for the preparation of transition implementation plans. Using these guidelines, cabinet secretaries or authorised officers and county governments were to prepare and submit to TA and CIC the transition plans and CIC would monitor their implementation.
Reports submitted by County Governments to CIC during the reporting period indicate that a total of 10 different types of plans were prepared. These plans included:
(a)      County government transition implementation plan,
(b)     Urban areas and cities plans,
(c)      County development plans,
(d)     County sectoral plans, and
(e)      Spatial plans.
The approval of these plans was reported as work-in-progress with only one county having approved the County Governments Transition Implementation Plan. Majority of the counties (over 82%) operated without specific approved plans and a significant number were yet to commence processes of developing the plans. The detailed report is found in CIC website (www.cickenya.org)
4.4     Consultations on the Implementation of Devolution
(i)      Implementation of the Right to Health
 
The Commission has been working with the Ministry of Health on the implementation of the right to health under the devolved structure of government. This is the sector the Commission has extensively engaged with. The Commission discussed with the Ministry of Health a tool aimed at providing a step-by-step practical guide in analysing, unbundling and costing economic and social rights as provided for in Article 43 of the Constitution, and in other relevant legislation and international instruments which assign responsibility for their implementation and monitoring. It is expected that the tool will facilitate effective devolution of these rights and stimulate planning for their progressive realization as provided in Article 21(2) of the Constitution.
 
The tool include the process of functional analysis, unbundling and costing as follows:
Step 1: Functional Analysis based on the functional assignment in the 4th Schedule of the Constitution.
Step 2: Standards for Service Delivery that identify the minimum standards for service delivery in respect of the function.
Step 3: Costing of functions to assign costs to each of the activities identified.
Step 4: Policies, Legislation and Administrative Procedures for actualizing the functions at national, county and intergovernmental level.
The tool provides a guide to be used in a participatory and consultative manner with all relevant stakeholders including non-state actors. The tool was approved for use and will be disseminated to other Ministries with devolved functions for replication.
 
(ii)               Forum on Devolution - Prospects for the Kenya’s Health Sector
 
During the reporting period, the Commission was invited by the Development Initiative to a round table meeting on the prospects for the health sector under the system of devolved government. The meeting brought together participants from both governmental and non-governmental institutions working within the health sector, constitutional bodies and research institutions. The key highlights from the meeting were:
 
(a)     Challenges relating to transfer of functions. It was anticipated that Health being a function to the county governments, the same was to be transferred based on preparedness of the county governments. However, TA noted, the lack of adequate capacity in terms of staff and facilities in various Counties to handle this devolved function. The lack of structures for remitting personal emoluments was also of great concern especially to workers in health sector.
 
(b)    CIC noted that Devolution, in particular the health function that is a devolved function under the 4th Schedule, should be implemented in accordance to the Constitution. The standards provided for in Article 43(1) of the Constitution, should be read together with the international conventions and treaties that Kenya has ratified. These include Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
(c)     One of the major concerns raised included the monitoring of funds allocated for health care as a devolved function. The Abuja Convention on Health, 2001states that 12% of the national budget should be allocated to health. Kenya is a signatory to this convention, however only 2% of the national budget is allocated to health. The concern was raised on how the Government or other stakeholders will ensure that at least 12% of the county budgets are allocated to health.
 
(d)    The meeting also agreed that nutrition should be addressed and prioritized by the Government.
 
(e)     Further, due to lack of capacity by county governments and other challenges, and health being an important function, which cannot be disrupted, it was recommended that the health function should remain under the national government until the counties have the capacity to fully handle the health function.       
 
(iii)   Consultative Meeting with the Departmental Committee on Health
 
CIC, the National Assembly Departmental Committee on Health and representatives from Ministry of Devolution and Planning, the Transition Authority, the Kenya National Union of Nurses and the Union of Doctors, Kenya Medical Practitioners, Pharmacists and Dentists Union held a consultative meeting to discuss challenges facing health workers in the new constitutional dispensation. The following were agreed upon:
 
(a)     Transfer of Health workers salaries - Funds for Personal Emoluments were to be retained at the National Government to facilitate payment of salaries for 6 months or until the county governments had capacity to deal with payroll issues.
 
(b)     Health Service Commission –The Ministry of Health had prepared an amendment to the Constitution to provide for the inclusion of the Health Service Commission as a constitutional commission. However the Departmental Committee on Health highlighted the difficulty in amending the Constitution and proposed that such a Commission be established as a statutory body.
 
Although the Ministry noted the advice of CIC that the establishment of the Health Service Commission is contentious and not compliant with the Constitution, it still recommended that the Departmental Committee on Health consider amending the Constitution through the Constitutional Amendment Bill 2013 to include the establishment of the Health Service Commission for the following reasons:
(a)      Healthcare is an essential service whose disruption leads to fatalities including death of patients.
(b)      The attempt to lump all services as one, under the Public Service did not distinguish the distinct and essential nature of health services and had resulted in the delay in expediting matters relating to health service delivery.
(c)      There was need for standardization, regulation of the quality of services delivered in the health sector to prevent inequalities in service delivery across the country.  
(d)      The Commission was to ensure standardization in the training and skills development of healthcare workers across the country.
(c)      Involvement of Health Workers in Devolution Process- The Union officials observed that there was inadequate information and clarity on functions being devolved and the determination of the components to be devolved. The union officials noted that they are the implementers and hence need to be involved in the determination of these and related matters.
 
(d)     Recruitment of 12,000 maternity nurses and 30 nurses per county- The Ministry of Health advised that the Treasury had devolved 3.5 billion to counties for recruitment of personnel. The Ministry recommended the reversal of funds from the counties to allow for recruitment. It was reported that consultations on this matter are on-going with the Treasury, Council of Governors and the Transition Authority.  It was agreed that there was need to balance the wage bill against the right to the highest attainable standard of health, the latter of which requires adequate personnel.
 
(e)      Abolition of Contractual Employment - The Ministry was advised by Treasury against contract variation for existing contracts to prevent budget deficits. The union leaders noted the need to ensure that all nurses are engaged on permanent and pensionable terms since the nurses on contract earn less than their peers and their terms are not equal. They also noted the need for clarity on the transition of health workers from the Public Service Commission to the County Public Service Board.
 
(iv)   Health Sector Intergovernmental Consultative Meeting
 
The Ministry of Health facilitated a health sector intergovernmental consultative meeting that brought together CIC and the County Executive Committees responsible for Health matters. The meeting was a follow up to a previous one that brought together stakeholders from different sectors and in which sector specific intergovernmental consultative forums were constituted. The following were agreed on:
 
(a)    County Executive Committee members were to facilitate the review of the Health Policy and the Health Bill and forward their comments to the Commission by 20th October 2013.
 
(b)   The Ministry of Health was to compile and share with County Executive Committee members, policies, laws and guidelines within the health sector to facilitate the counties to adopt their own policies and laws. Further, the Ministry was to develop an annual calendar for trainings and workshops by 20th October 2013.
(c)    As part of intergovernmental communication protocols, the Cabinet Secretary was to communicate directly to the County Executive Committee members while the Principal Secretary was to communicate directly to the Chief Officers.
(d)   Human Resource Management
(i)      The Ministry of Health was to stop the on-going inter-county staff transfers and the counties were to assess key needs i.e., doctors and dentists and advise the national government to facilitate transfer and rationalization.
(ii)    The human resource committee (constituted at the meeting) to address outstanding issues that included assessment of staff to determine transfer requirements/staff needs
(iii)   Counties would conduct a training needs assessment
 
(e)      On health financing, it was agreed that the National Government discloses to the counties development funds earmarked for them. Further, the Health Financing Committee, constituted at the meeting, was to explore feasible mechanisms for future donor support, management and governance arrangements for user fees and free maternity services based on the existing legal frameworks.
(f)      The Ministry was to develop guidelines and a committee was to be established to address:
 
(i)                   Criteria for classification and additional financing of cross-county service
(ii)                 Plan to support cross county services particularly human resource and essential commodities; infrastructure
(iii)                Analyse inter-county referrals
 
(g)      Counties were to be included in the review of the Kenya Medical Supplies Agency Act, 2013. A procurement committee was constituted to discuss essential medicines list and guidelines and disclose the list of equipment and beneficiaries to counties.
 
(h)     An annual Health Congress was to be held in the last week of October 2013.
 
(i)       On functional assignment as per the Fourth Schedule and county involvement in unbundling process, it was agreed that the consultative forum facilitates and coordinates transfer and delegation of functions.
 
(j)       The National Government was to provide guidance on dealing with disaster management and epidemics and clarity on related roles for the different levels.
 
(v)               Consultation with Senators and Governors
 
In an effort to facilitate effective implementation of devolution, CIC organized a consultative workshop with the Senators and Governors in July 2013. The forum deliberated on issues touching on the implementation of the system of devolved government and agreed on several quick action points to be implemented by the Senate. These include:
 
(a)     Development of a framework to guide the implementation of the Senate’s mandate under Article 96 of the Constitution.
 
(b)    Clarification of the Senate’s mandate on representation of Counties and protection of the interests of County governments (Article 96).
 
(c)     Development of the Senate Bill to expound on the Senate’s mandate and harmonize the Senate’s standing orders to make the House operate effectively. The Bill should stress the oversight role of the Senate especially over the National and the County Assemblies. The Senate to agree on the timelines for the development of the Bill.
 
(d)    Active engagement and leveraging on opportunities provided by the Constitution through development of formal and informal working modalities with the National Assembly, the National Executive, the County Executive and the County Assembly.
 
(e)     Development of a strategic plan to gauge the Senate’s progress (timelines, outputs, milestones) and strengthen its oversight role in the Parliamentary Budget Office;
 
(f)     Development of mechanisms as provided in the various relevant Acts to allow the Senate to participate in critical operations affecting County governments. These could include intra-house committees to interact with Bills and assess their effects on the County governments as well as nominating members in the relevant Commissions that require its representation.
 
(vi)              Civic Education Forum
 
The Commission participated in a forum organized by the Transition Authority whose mandate among others is to facilitate civic education on devolution. The objective of the forum was to agree on an effective coordination mechanism for civic education on devolution; identify critical topics for civic education messaging. In addition the forum was to develop strategies and resources for delivery of civic education messages and a framework for general monitoring and evaluation. The following was agreed as a way forward:
 
(a)      A comprehensive stakeholder mapping be undertaken to bring on board county governance leadership.
 
(b)     Devolution thematic group coordination mechanism to be established.
 
(c)       Facilitate the formation of the County Civic Education units/frameworks.
 
(d)      An integrated Civic Education Monitoring and Evaluation framework to be developed.
 
(e)      Relevant public participation/civic education policy and legal frameworks to be enacted.
 
(f)      Develop and finalize a civic education program budget.
 
(g)      Engagement with the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) process to ensure that civic education is provided for.
 
(h)     A national civic education sustainable funding strategy to be finalized for tabling to policy makers and development partners.
 
4.5  Establishment of the Intergovernmental Structures
The Intergovernmental Relations Act, (No.2) 2012 establishes the following intergovernmental relations structures;
(a)      National and county government coordinating summit – an apex body for intergovernmental relations;
(b)     Intergovernmental relations technical committee – responsible for the day to day administration of the Summit and of the Council of Governors, and take over residual functions of TA after its dissolution, among other functions;
(c)      Sectoral working groups or committees – established by the Intergovernmental Relations Technical Committee for better carrying out of its functions;
 
(d)     Intergovernmental relations secretariat  - for the day to day administration of the technical committee;
 
(e)      Council of governors – to facilitate consultations amongst counties,
 
(f)      Joint committees – which may be established by either the national or a county government with specific mandates of achieving the objects and principles of devolution provided in Articles 174 and 175 of the Constitution.
 
During the reporting period, only the National and County Government Coordinating Summit and Council of Governors had been established.
 
4.6. Intergovernmental Consultative Forum
Section 13(2) of the Intergovernmental Relations Act enables the Cabinet Secretary responsible for intergovernmental relations to convene consultative fora on sectoral issues of common interest to the national and county governments. On this basis, the Ministry of Devolution and Planning convened meetings to deliberate on the modalities for the establishment of inter-sectoral consultative forum to increase consultations and working relationships between the national government and the county governments. The Purpose of the meeting was to;
Provide a platform for dialogue and engagement of critical stakeholders in the sector;
Act as a liaison between the national government and county departments;
To coordinate the attainment of policy goals and standards in the sector
Among the main resolutions of meeting were;
(a)      Have the membership to the forum consist of the cabinet secretary for the convening ministry who will be the chairperson, a vice-chairperson who will be elected among the county executive committee members on rotational basis, and the 47 county executive committee members for the sector.
(b)     Functions of the inter-sectoral forum to include among others
 
Coordinating and harmonizing development of norms, policies, laws and priorities
 
Evaluate the performance of the sector in realizing goals, and recommend appropriate action
 
Monitoring the implementation of national and county plans
 
Receive and review progress reports from national and county levels
 
Produce annual reports on matters pertaining to the sector
 
Promotion of governance and partnership principles across the sector
 
Implement and follow-up actions and recommendations from the national and the county government coordinating summit
 
Reporting, where the forum shall submit reports on sector to technical committee of the Summit, the Ministry of Devolution and Planning, the Council of Governors, CIC, Commission on Revenue Allocation (CRA) and the TA
 
(c)      A total of 7 Sectors were identified to include; 1. Health, 2. Agriculture, livestock and fisheries, 3. Energy and petroleum, 4. Lands, housing and urban development, 5. Environment, water and natural resources, 6. Trade and industrialization, 7. Transport and infrastructure.
 
(d)     The different sectors identified the Status of the transfer of the functions to county governments, policy gaps and statutory change requirements and various capacity building and technical assistance needs and made recommendations on how to meet the needs.
(e)      It was also resolved that Sectoral meetings start in the month of September with the Ministry of Devolution and Planning being responsible for coordination of the fora and facilitating implementation of decisions from the fora at the different levels.
CIC notes with concern the delayed establishment of the Intergovernmental Relations Technical Committee, which has hindered effective functioning of the Summit and recommends immediate actions to establish the same.
4.7     Establishment of Structures and Systems of County Governments 
Compliance with the letter and the spirit of the Constitution of Kenya requires county governments to develop institutional structures and systems necessary for the effective implementation of the constitution. Some of the structures envisaged include the county assemblies, county executives, county public service boards and county executive committees. Analysis of the county assembly reports on the establishment of these structures indicate various levels of achievements as outlined below.
(a)     County Assemblies
Most of the County Assemblies fulfilled the requirement on membership stipulated in the law, with the two-thirds gender rule being met by all Assemblies. Overall representations in 16 county assemblies showed a composition of 66% male and 34% female. Other groups represented in the elective posts include the marginalized, and the youths forming 9% and 26% of the total county assembly membership respectively.
However, though the constitutional edict to fill the gender quota through nominations has been honoured, there is need for each County Assembly, and each County Government, to consider how to ensure that the gender quota is met through elections so that the nominations and consequent large numbers of the Assemblies do not prejudice the   provisions of Article 201 of the Constitution on principles of public finance, particularly prudent and responsible use of resources. Extensive use of the County revenue to pay emoluments to large numbers in the Assemblies naturally reduces the County’s revenues that would otherwise be available for development programmes.
(b)     Legislation; 
Most of the county Assemblies debated and passed a number of Bills during the reporting period in line with the legislative role. A total of 59 Bills were processed during the reporting period from 34 county assemblies, with 94% being Appropriation Bills. There are however concerns about the constitutionality of some of those Bills including those dealing with tax waivers and the creation and management of Ward Development Funds. Such Bills violate the provisions of the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act, 2012, and contradict the principle of separation of powers.
Though majority of the counties legislated the appropriation and supplementary appropriation Bills, the Counties did not fulfil the necessary pre-requisites for passing of budgets and Appropriation Bills. The pre-requisites include the County Fiscal Strategy Paper, County integrated plans and other relevant plans stipulated in the PFM Act and the County Government Act.  This may indicate that some of the mandatory steps in the budgeting process, including the participation of the people [as required by Sections 107 of County Government Act and 125 of the PFM Act and Article 220 of Constitution] were not fully adhered to.
Only 3 counties established the cap during the reporting period as required by law. Counties should urgently address the issue to ensure full compliance with the Constitution.
(c)      Approvals:
Article 185 gives County Assemblies the power to approve certain policies and plans, such as policies for (a) management and exploitation of a county’s natural resources and (b) the development and management of its infrastructure and institutions. During reporting period there were minimal approvals of the county policies with a majority of the counties concentrated on legislation.
Some county assemblies started processing a number of county plans. Some of the plans started include County Government Transition Implementation Plans, Urban Areas And Cities Plans, County Development Plans, County Sectoral Plans, and Spatial Plans. The approval of plans was reported as work-in-progress with only one county having approved the county Governments Transition Implementation Plan. 
(d)     Approval of Decentralized Units: 
Counties are authorised to devolve further (Article 176 of CoK2010) as may be considered appropriate by the respective governments with some of the devolved administrative units being the sub-counties, ward and villages. As per the County Government Act, the decentralized units have to be approved by a county assembly. Two out of 34 counties reported to have approved the urban areas and cities units. Most of the approvals of the decentralized units, initiated by the counties, were reported as still work-in-progress with 8 counties reporting sub counties, wards (9 counties), and village units (7 counties). Over 74% of the counties were yet to initiate processes leading to approval of decentralized units.
(e)      County Executive Committees and County Officers
County governments are given the powers to establish county offices necessary for the delivery of services (Article 235 of the Constitution) and approve the nomination of officers to public offices. A number of county assemblies approved various nominees to the different public offices between April and June 2013.  Five counties reported having approved the nomination of the county assembly clerk, 2 counties had approved the nominees for the county chief office.
Articles 179 and 183 of the Constitution require the county governments to establish county executive committees (CEC) to supervise the administration and delivery of services in the county and all decentralized units and agencies in the county among others. During the reporting period majority of the county assemblies, (26 out of 34), had approved county executive committee nominations and most of them had already started performing their different roles. Only twelve counties had approved the nominees of county assembly into county assembly service boards, six counties approved the county secretary and one county approved nominees into county public office.
(f)      County Public Service Boards 
County assemblies are required to establish County Public Service Boards(CPSB). Majority of the counties had established structures for appointment of other public officers into county offices. Most counties, 22 out of 34 counties approved the chairperson and the membership to the CPSB. While most of the county assemblies had approved the CPSBs, a number were yet to assume active roles. There is need for the county governments to ensure that;
The CPSB are fully operational as soon as is practicable;
The requisite regulations and frameworks for managing the human resource in counties are developed;
 
(g)     Urban Areas and Cities
Article 184 of the Constitution requires establishment of criteria to classify urban areas and cities, their governance and management that provides for participation by residents in their governance of urban areas and cities. These principles are provided for in the Urban Areas and Cities Act, 2011.  This classification has not been done. However, TA in its August 2013 report indicated that a taskforce had been set up which recommended a change in the criteria prescribed for classification of urban areas and cities. Following the recommendation, the Attorney General included the recommendations in the statute law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 2013, to make minor amendments to the Urban Areas and Cities Act, 2011.
4.7  Challenges to Devolution
The transition to the system of devolved government, took effect after the General election held on March 4th, 2013. A number of successes and challenges have been noted since then
(1)    Delayed Establishment of Intergovernmental Relations Structures: Delayed establishment of other structures, for example the Intergovernmental Relation Technical Committee has hindered effective functioning of the Summit
 
(2)    Review, Development and Publication of Devolution Related Legislation Outside the Law: Section 14(2) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution requires that any Bill relating to the system of devolved government may be enacted only after CIC and the Commission on Revenue Allocation are consulted, and given thirty days to consider such legislation and any recommendations by the two Commissions are considered by Parliament. Despite this, Bills such as the County Governments (Amendment) (No.2) Bill did not follow the procedure set out in Article 261 and Section 14(2) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.
 
(3)    Delayed Functional Analysis, Unbundling of Functions and Costing: As noted in this section, this function is the responsibility of Transition Authority. The delays and undue political pressure have affected the transfer of functions to county governments. Further delays will affect Transition Implementation Plans and Integrated Plans required of the County Governments.
 
(4)    Lack of Political Will to Implement Devolution–The implementation of the devolved system of government has been adversely affected by among other things the delays in carrying out functional analysis. According to reports by the Transitional Authority, the institution charged with facilitating the analysis of functions, this delay was caused by failure and/or reluctance by some government ministries to provide the necessary information that would facilitate functional analysis and costing of the functions. Secondly, a number of MDAs also failed to provide Transitional Implementation Plans that would help speed up the transfer of functions to the county governments. Finally, political pressure has also been made to bear on transitional authority by the summit to transfer functions to county governments without necessarily following the law.
(5)    Delay in the Release of the PFM Act Regulations: This has prejudiced the full and effective implementation of the PFM Act. This problem is especially critical in the Counties as existing regulations saved by the Act cannot apply in the Counties new circumstances
 
(6)    Dearth of Capacity in Public Finance in the Country: This affects the Counties most severely. Even where personnel exist, there is need for intensive training to bring the personnel in line with the new dictates of public finance.
 
(7)    Unreliable Internet Connectivity in Many Counties: This has made it difficult to apply the Integrated Finance Management System in the counties. The use of manual systems has the potential to lead to loss of public monies. It is essential that all Counties have working systems as soon as possible.
 
(8)    Monthly Release of Funds to Counties: The release of revenue due to the Counties on a monthly basis as opposed to quarterly tranches needs review as it is already prejudicing some Counties ability to plan and effect service delivery seamlessly. 
 
(9)    Delays in Passing County Budgets: Delays by some Counties in preparing and passing their revised budgets by 30th September may mean delays in accessing the funds due to them. Some Counties have also not passed their Revenue Acts. This will compromise their revenue collection. 
 
(10) Adjournment of Sittings: Citing salary issues, county assemblies adjourned their sittings at will affecting their performance on legislative authority and oversight role as indicated in article 185 of constitution.
 
(11) Gap in the Constitution on Temporary Filling of Governors Position in Case of a Successful Petition: It is not quite clear from the Constitution, who takes over from the governor when his/her election is nullified following a petition, as was witnessed in Siaya County. The law does not specify the process to be used for the speaker to assume office. This therefore calls for development of legislation framework to address the gap.
PART FIVE
PROMOTING CONSTITUTIONALISM AND PROTECTING THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE PEOPLE
In recognition of the sovereign power of the people of Kenya as enshrined in Article 1, the fundamental right to information under Article 35 and the National Values and Principles of Governance set out in Article 10 of the Constitution, the Commission is committed to keeping the people of Kenya informed on the status of the implementation of the Constitution and other matters that touch on constitutionalism. The media remains a critical partner in ensuring that this is achieved either through informed editorial content and reporting or information and education broadcast through the electronic and print media. The Commission has embraced use of various social media platforms to reach out the general public.
This chapter discusses media statements and public advisories issued by CIC, and stakeholder engagements during the reporting period.
5.1 Media Statements and Public Advisories 
(1)    Advisory on Proposals to Amend the Constitution of Kenya 2010
The Commission received two proposals for the Amendment of the Constitution 2010. One proposal was for the amendment of Articles 89, 90, 97, 98, 136 and 180 of the Constitution while the second proposal was for the amendment of Article 204 of the Constitution. CIC reviewed the two proposals and on 15th July 2013, sent an advisory of the proposed amendments to the Departmental Committee of Justice and Constitutional Affairs of the National Assembly, to be considered during the pre-publication scrutiny of the Bills.
(2)    Advisory on the Constitution of Kenya (Amendment) Bill, 2013
The Constitution of Kenya (Amendment) Bill, 2013, published on 12th July 2013, seeks to amend Article 260 of the Constitution, by deleting the offices of Members of Parliament, Judges & Magistrates and Members of County Assemblies from the list of designated State Offices. CIC issued a public advisory on the proposed amendments to the Constitution on 1st September 2013, in two newspapers with national wide circulation.
(3)    Statement on the Amendment of the County Government Bill,
The County Governments (Amendment)(No.2), 2013 Bill originated from Senate and was published on 7th August 2013. It proposes to amend the County Governments Act, 2012 by inserting a new section to provide for the establishment of County Development Boards in each county. The National Assembly and County Assemblies have the oversight responsibility of scrutinizing and approving plans and budgets for the National government and County governments respectively, while the National Executives and County Executive have the responsibility of implementing projects in line with approved plans and budgetary allocations and reporting back to the legislative arms of the respective governments. In giving Senators and MPs coordination and implementation roles in County Governments, the Bill mixes these two responsibilities and muddles the separation of powers so clearly stated as one of the principles of devolution.
CIC issued a statement in the press on the proposed amendment that appeared on Sunday, 29th September 2013 national newspapers.
5.2 Stakeholder Engagements
The Commission engaged with stakeholders in the implementation of the Constitution. Stakeholders included Commissions and Independent Offices, Ministries, Departments and State Agencies, the Judiciary, the National Assembly and Non-State Actors. The engagements are in addition to consultations ordinarily undertaken in the course of developing and reviewing particular policies, legislation or regulations. The following section is a brief overview of stakeholder engagements undertaken by the Commission during the reporting period.
(1)    Meeting to Discuss Concept Paper on the Inclusion of Disability Rights in Mainstream Society
CIC developed a concept paper on “the Inclusion of Disability Rights in Mainstream Society” The paper was to be used as a guide by implementers in the inclusion of disability concerns in the development of legislation and administrative procedures. This was preceded by a consultative meeting organised by the commission on 1st August 2013, at the Kenya School of Government, to seek views from stakeholders representing persons with disabilities to inform the development of the concept paper. The Concept Paper will be circulated to all stakeholders once it is validated.
(2)    Meeting with the Network of Associations of Disabled People of Burundi (NADPB)
CIC held a meeting with the Network of Associations of Disabled People of Burundi on 7th August 2013 at the CIC offices. The purpose of the meeting was to share Kenya’s experiences and lessons learnt in the implementation of rights of persons with disabilities. The meeting observed that there was need to integrate rights of persons with disabilities in the society for progress to be made in the implementation of disability rights. The CIC team observed that the following progress has been achieved so far with regard to people with disabilities.
 
(a)        Parliament’s willingness to pass legislation on disability in 2003 (Persons with Disabilities Act) even before the adoption of the UN CRPD, and development of regulations to give effect to the Persons with Disabilities Act in 2005 and 2006 by the executive.
 
(b)        Article 2(6) of the Constitution incorporates international law into Kenya’s domestic law as long has Kenya has ratified the conventions and treaties. In addition, disability concerns are also now part of our national values and principles. As a result, Kenya is developing programs for inclusion.
(c)        The government has also been on the frontline of disability mainstreaming in employment.
 
(d)        Strong advocacy by civil society organizations has also contributed to the advancement of the rights of PWDs
(3)    Stakeholder Engagements in Public Finance Management
In various interactions with the public, CIC noticed a gap in the understanding of critical aspects of the public finance management under the Constitution and Public Finance Management Act, 2012. In a bid to enhance the public’s understanding of PFM, in March 2013, CIC, in conjunction with the International Budget Partnership developed a guide for the public titled “50 Things Every Kenyan Needs to Know About Public Finance under the Constitution”. CIC observed a similar gap among public officers, and consequently, in collaboration with IBP, developed the second publication titled “50 Things Every County Government Official Needs to Know About Public Finance Under the Constitution”. The second publication was released in the month of August to the 47 county executive members responsible for finance, the 47 county assembly speakers, the Ministry of Devolution and Planning, the National Treasury, the Council of County Governors and a number of civil society organizations.
(4)    Senate Committee Workshop with County Executive Members Responsible for Education
The Senate’s Standing Committee on Education, Information and Technology held a two-day workshop on 12th & 13th September 2013 with county executive members responsible for the education sector and other relevant stakeholders including CIC. The aim of the workshop was to develop a common understanding on county priorities, dynamics and challenges in matters concerning education and the role of information, communication and technology in the education sector within the context of the devolved government system.
(5)    Forum with Governors and Senators  
The Commission organized and facilitated a forum that brought together Governors and Senators to discuss devolution. The forum was held between 25th -28th July, 2013, in Kwale County. The theme of the forum was to enhance collaboration modalities for effective implementation of the system of devolved government. The objective was to identify areas and issues for collaboration between Senate and Governors, with two key deliverables:
Operational processes to facilitate collaboration between the Senate and county governments for effective devolution
Proposed priority legislation for operationalization of service delivery by the county governments.
Discussions focused on
The legislative Agenda for Effective Devolution
 
Role of the Senate and Counties (County Assemblies and County Executives)
 
Revenue Allocation and Budgeting Process
 
Role of Senate and county assemblies
 
Protecting the interests of counties and enhancing public participation
 
Role of the Senate and Governors
 
Linkages between Senate and County Governments (Opportunities and challenges for collaboration) for Effective Devolution
 
Annex 1 provides a matrix summary of action points, responsibilities and timeframe.
 
(6)    CIC and CIOC Retreat
The Constitution Implementation Oversight Committee (CIOC) is a parliamentary committee with the responsibility of oversight in the implementation of the Constitution. CIC reports to the Committee on the progress, challenges and impediments in the implementation of the Constitution.  
It was resolved that CIC and CIOC will work jointly to realize constitutionalism across government, and will foster open communication within a framework of mutual trust and respect.
(7)    Launch of 2012/2013 CIC Annual Report
Section 6(c) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution provides for the reporting role of the Commission on the progress of the constitution implementation. Section 26 of the CIC Act, 2010 provides for the annual report to be submitted to the president, parliament, published in the Gazette and in such other manner as the Commission may determine.
On August 28th, 2013, the Commission launched its second annual report covering the period July 2012–June 2013at a public function held in Wundanyi, Taita-Taveta County. The event, was graced by the Governor of Taita-Taveta County, and attended by the people of Taita-Taveta County, county assembly members, Members of Parliament from the county, leaders from the county, CIC commissioners and staff.
During the launch over 1000 copies of the Annual Report, 600copies of “50 Things Every Kenyan Needs to Know About Public Finance under the Constitution” and 150 copies of “50 Things Every County Government Official Needs to Know About Public Finance Under the Constitution” publications were distributed to those in attendance. The communities demanded for a Kiswahili version of the report for easier understanding, to which the Commission promised to send once the report has been translated into Kiswahili.
5.3 Litigation
The Commission did not initiate any new cases in the period under review. However, the Commission continued to pursue other matters pending in court, which are at various stages of consideration. No judgement was delivered in a matter to which CIC was a Party to during the period. The matters pending in court include:
High Court Petition No 400 of 2012, Isaac Aluoch Aluochier vs. The AG (An application contesting the increase of MP’s salaries which according to the Petitioner is a function reserved for the Salaries and Remuneration Commission).
 
High Court Petition No. 71 of 2013, TISA vs. The Attorney General and Another, (The issue of disbursement of the CDF to outgoing Members of Parliament to enable them complete various projects before the next General Elections).
 
Supreme Court Ref No 2 of 2013. Supreme Court Advisory Opinion; The Speaker of the Senate and the Senate, The Attorney General & Others  (The Senate is seeking an advisory opinion on whether the National Assembly faulted in amending The Division of Revenue Bill, 2013 before submitting it for assent)
 
CIC will report on the outcomes of these cases once concluded.
Notwithstanding the undetermined matters to which CIC is a party to, there are a number of constitutional references decided by the Courts.  These include; High Court Petition No 65 of 2010 Satrose Ayuma& 11 Others vs. The Registered Trustees of the Kenya Railway Staff Retirement Benefits Scheme, The Kenya Railways Cooperation & The AG (Muthurwa Case). The Commission takes the liberty to discuss a brief overview of the findings.
(1)    High Court Petition No 65 of 2010:SatroseAyuma& 11 Others vs. The Registered Trustees of the Kenya Railway Staff Retirement Benefits Scheme, The Kenya Railways Corporation & A.G& 2 Others
This case primarily canvassed the issues of illegal evictions, in the context of Article 43 of the Constitution (Economic and Social Rights), including the right to housing, sanitation, health, water as well as right to human dignity.
The Petitioners challenged notice of evictions issued against them and claimed their rights to decent housing, sanitation, health, water, education as well as their right to human dignity had been violated. The 1st Respondent claimed to be a private body thus did not owe the Petitioners any guarantee of fundamental human rights and freedoms, while the 2nd Respondent submitted that it had transferred the suit premises to the 1st Respondent therefore had no role in the Petition.
The 3rd Respondent submitted that the subject of the Petition was a landlord- tenant agreement, the Petitioners had not demonstrated a right to the suit premises and that the socio-economic rights demanded could only be realized progressively.
In issuing the Judgment on 26thof August 2013, Justice Isaac Lenaola invoked and applied the Constitutional principles and the United Nations Basic Principles and Guidelines on Development Based Displacement. Finding no wrong doing on the part of the 2nd Respondent, the learned Judge held that the 1st Respondent had violated the Petitioners’ rights to accessible and adequate housing contrary to Article 43 of the Constitution.
The 3rd Respondent was directed to:
Consider amendments to the Water Services Act, 2002 in line with the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
 
File an Affidavit detailing out existing or planned State policies and legal framework on forced evictions and demolitions in Kenya in line with international standards, plus,
 
An Affidavit detailing out the measures the Government has put in place towards the realization of the right to accessible and adequate housing and sanitation.
 
The 1st Respondent and Petitioners were directed to convene a meeting to map out an eviction programme taking into account:
 
(a)     That, neutral observers be allowed access to the suit premises at the time of eviction.
 
(b)    Mandatory presence of Government officials or representatives including Nairobi County Government officials and security officers.
 
(c)     Compliance with the right to human dignity, life and security of the evictees.
 
(d)    Evictions must not take place at night, in bad weather, during festivals or holidays, prior to any election, during or just prior to school exams but preferably at the end of the school term or during school holidays.
 
(e)     That no one is subjected to indiscriminate attacks.
PART SIX
ANALYSIS OF REPORTS FROM MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND STATE AGENCIES ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
In April 2011 the Commission established a framework (Circular OP.CAB.17/84/1A of 20th April 2011) to facilitate working with government institutions (executive and other state organs) in the implementation of the Constitution and reporting on the progress. The Commission also developed a reporting framework (including templates and timelines) for submission of quarterly reports by all state organs. Though irregular, government institutions submitted quarterly reports on the status of implementation of the Constitution. During the period of June to September 2013, the Commission undertook an analysis of those reports received since April 2011. Section 6.1 below provides asummary of the findings.
During the same period, the Commission undertook a baseline survey to establish progress made towards implementation of the Constitution, and getting the consolidated information, especially on formulation of policies, enactment of legislation, development of administrative procedures and required institutional frameworks as well as preparedness for devoultion. Section 6.2 provides the summary findings. Full reports of the two analyses are found in CIC office and the website (www.cickenya.org).
6.1     Summary Findings from Progress Reports 
The objective of the study was to analyze all the quarterly reports received from various ministries, departments and state agencies (MDAs) for the period April 2011 to December 2012. The study output included; improved reporting frameworks that would be used by ministries, state organs, county governments and legislative assemblies to report to CIC on the implementation of the Constitution; a one package comprehensive feedback to ministries and state agencies arising from the analysis of reports, and a special supplement report arising from the main report for the purpose of publishing. The reporting framework required information on various variables, including
(a)      Overall sectoral policy, other laws, subsidiary legislation and administrative instruments in the institution/sector.
(b)     Measures for familiarization with the Constitution, including availing copies of the Constitution and sensitization workshop for the staff
(c)      Isolation of sector specific provisions and sensitization of staff on their role in implementation of the provisions.
(d)     Integration of the implementation of the constitution in performance contracts.
(e)      Comprehensive audit of policies, laws, by-laws, regulations and administrative procedures, government guidelines and circulars required to implement the Constitution.
(f)      Devolution – specifically, measures taken in preparation for system of devolved government after the next general elections
(g)      List of ratified international treaties and conventions that relate to specific sectors.
(h)     Status of development of change management strategy
(i)       Collaboration with CIC.
Annex 4 provides a summary of MDAs which reported on the above variables. In brief, the total number of MDAs at the time the circular was issued was 227; comprising of 44 ministries and 183 state organs. 32 ministries out of a total of 44 ministries and 25 state organs out of a total of 183 state organs submitted the quarterly reports at least once during the period under review. The analysis categorised the MDAs into ministries, regulatory authorities, commercial enterprises, tertiary institutions, constitutional commissions and other. The reports were submitted by: ministries  (84 reports), regulatory authorities (7 reports), commercial enterprises (10 reports), tertiary institutions (3 reports), constitutional commissions (1 report) and other institutions (13 reports). No single institution submitted all the reports, with 170 MDAs not submitting even a single report. Annex 3 provides summary findings.
6.2  Summary of Status of Constitution Implementation and Key Performance Indicators
The implementation assessment sought to establish progress made towards implementation of the Constitution, thus setting the base consolidated information, especially in formulation of policies, enactment of legislation and the development of administrative procedures and required institutional frameworks.
The sample size for the study was 80 institutions divided into two. 40 institutions that have at least made reports to CIC and 40 institutions that have not submitted any report. The findings show that all public institutions have policies, many dating to pre-promulgation of the Constitution. The identification of policies was done at three levels: national (where for example, policies on gender mainstreaming, disability, marginalization and diversity were made and cascaded uniformly to all public institutions); sector-wide (where ministries identified sectoral policies to be applicable to institutions under specific ministries or sectors); and, institution specific policies.
41 out of the 80 institutions in the sample had identified policies to be developed. The majority of institutions had identified between one and four policies to be developed. While the majority of the institutions had started the process of developing their policies, only a few had been completed.
As expected, public institutions had in existence a number of legislation for the implementation of the Constitution. The total number in each institution varies from those with as many as ten (such as the Capital Markets (10 legislations), Ministry of Agriculture (12 legislations), the Kenya Industrial Estates (11 legislations), the University of Nairobi (15 legislations) and, the Ministry of Education (24 legislations), to those with just one or two legislations such as the Public Procurement Oversight Authority and the Retirement Benefits Authority (one legislation each) and, the Media Council of Kenya (2 legislations). Most of the existing legislations pre-date the promulgation of the Constitution of Kenya. The study showed that, not many had been reviewed to align with the Constitution.
Further, the study showed that a majority of public institutions have in place administrative procedures but the exact number varies greatly. The numbers of existing administrative procedures ranges from 27 for the Ministry of Education; 12 for the Public Procurement Oversight Authority; 11 for Ministry of Information to one for the Export Processing Zones and for Ministry of Defence. A majority of these predate the Constitution of Kenya 2010.
PART SEVEN
CHALLENGES AND POTENTIAL IMPEDIMENTS TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
This chapter is dedicated to challenges, potential impediments and recommendations, which may also have been mentioned in various chapters. Specifically, challenges to devolution are discussed under Part Four of this report.
7.1 Substantive Amendment to Legislation through the Statute Law (Miscellaneous) Bill: 
There appears to be a systematic attempt to defeat the letter and spirit of the Constitution by various statute law miscellaneous amendments made from time to time, most of which offer little opportunity for public participation and comment before enactment. Examples include
 
The Commission is concerned by the use of the Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill to effect substantive and major changes to legislation. The Miscellaneous Bill is only intended to effect minor and primarily editorial amendments to laws. However, our review of the proposed The State Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 2013, revealed that major changes, some of which are unconstitutional and some of which have no policy basis have been sneaked into the Omnibus Bill. An example is an attempt to claw back on the principle of accountability integrated into the National Intelligence Service  Bill by proposing amendments to remove powers of the National Security Council, which has supervisory power over national security organs, and give them to the Director General of National Intelligence Service. Functions are being proposed to be given to constitutional offices, which the Constitution does not permit. This is in violation of Article 2(2) of the Constitution.
Recommendation: The Attorney General should ensure that the Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendment) Bill is used only to effect minor changes and not as a vehicle of violating the Constitution to legislating, which denies the people of Kenya their constitutional right to participate in the legislative process. Parliament must be vigilant in its scrutiny of the Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendment) Bill to ensure that major amendments are not effected through this Bill.
7.2 Disregard of Constitutional Procedure of Developing and Processing Bills:
Article 261 of the Constitution outlines the process to be used in the generation of legislation, and requires that the Attorney General should, in consultation with CIC, prepare Bills for tabling in Parliament. Section 14(2) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution requires that any Bill relating to the system of devolved government may be enacted only after CIC and the Commission on Revenue Allocation are consulted, and given thirty days to consider such legislation and any recommendations by the two Commissions are considered by Parliament.
 
Despite this clear procedure, Bills such as County Governments (Amendment) (No.2) Bill was published outside of the procedure of Article 261 and Section 14(2) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.
There has also been late submission of Bills to CIC for review.
 
Recommendation: All State Organs involved in the development of Legislation to adhere to the process laid out in the Constitution for enactment of legislation.
 
Overlap in formulating legislative proposals: While appreciating the prerogative of Parliament to legislate, there is an emerging trend where private members Bills appear to render efforts by state departments to formulate policy and legislative proposals irrelevant notwithstanding the financial resources employed in the process.
Recommendations:Members of Parliament should liaise with the respective executives to ensure that all legislative proposals are made in such a way as to meet the needs of this country and accord with the Constitution.
All state and non-state actors, including parliamentarians need to renew their resolve to promote, protect and defend the Constitution.
The Proposed Amendment to Article 260 of the Constitution by deleting the offices of Members of Parliament, Judges & Magistrates and Members of County Assemblies from the list of designated State Offices. This amendment will have far-reaching effect on the Constitution as detailed in Annex 3. For example, State officers will be precluded from the application of Chapter Six thereby reversing the gains made in entrenching good governance in legislative assemblies and the Judiciary. It will necessitate a re-definition of Article 1 and many others, which use the term “State” to refer to all three arms of government. It will also reduce the oversight scope of the National Assembly and the Senate. This directly interferes with the functions of Parliament and therefore   requires a referendum.
Recommendation: The proposed amendment to be subjected to a popular referendum
7.3 Limited Focus to Development of Policies
There has been more focus on review/development of legislation without policies that support them. This is demonstrated by large number of Bills being submitted for review and only a few policies.
Recommendation: Policies are necessary foundations for legislation. National and county governments should adopt a legislative process that prioritises police making before legislation.
7.4 Failure, neglect or refusal to develop required regulations to give effect to legislation. 
There are many Acts of Parliament that need regulations. The continued absence of the regulations means that the old regulations apply despite the fact that they do not comply with the Constitution. In instances where legislation is new, there is no regulatory framework and therefore creating a vacuum that can potentially cause confusion, conflict and at the worst pose a threat to national security.
Despite the Commission requesting for the regulations relating to the National Government Coordination Act, National Security Council Act, Power of Mercy Act and the National Police Service Act, none of these have been submitted. The offices responsible for the failure include the Cabinet secretary responsible for Internal Security and National Coordination, the Director General of Police, and The Attorney General.
The Commission did also request the Registrar of Political Parties for their regulations that are required to fully effect the Political Parties Act, 2011 and in particular, those outlined under Section 49 of the Act, so as to check the constitutionality and consistency with the relevant legislation of the regulations. As of end of September, these Regulations had not been submitted to CIC for review.
Recommendation: The development of these regulations is a legal requirement and not optional or discretionary. All affected institutions should develop relevant regulations and submit them to CIC without further undue delays.
7.5 Delays in Establishment of Constitutional Commissions
The establishment of various commissions under and by virtue of chapter15 of the Constitution is not only imperative but was also designed to ensure effective realisation of the aspirations of the people of Kenya. Whereas a majority of the constitutional commissions envisaged in chapter 15 have been established, the appointment of commissioners to the Teachers Service Commission and the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights has been pending. While the establishment of KNCHR has been hampered partly by judicial intervention on petition by various parties, the continued delay in the establishment of the two commissions stands in the way of proper management of the Teachers Service Commission and the discharge of the critical role of the human rights body.
There have been cases of undermining some of the commissions and independent offices by other arms of the government. For instance the structured targeting of SRC by parliament over the salaries, limited allocation of funds to commissions and independent offices makes it hard for the institutions to operate.
Recommendations:
 
(1)     All state actors involved need to hasten the establishment of the two institutions to avoid further delay,
 
(2)     The constitutional commissions need to stand together and support each other for effective implementation of constitution.
7.6 Unresponsiveness by some implementing agencies to enquiries of implementation of the Constitution
(i)                   CIC is required by law to report on the progress on implementation of the constitution. To enable CIC to carry out this mandate, it requires State organs to respond to enquiries on specific aspects on implementation. Some agencies including the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission have repeatedly failed to respond to inquiries by the CIC on key implementation issues.
Recommendation: CIC urges state agencies to cooperate in responding to enquiries on constitution implementation.
PART EIGHT
ACTIVITIES FOR THE NEXT QUARTER (OCTOBER-DECEMBER 2013)
Policy Review and Development
(a)      Review of priority labour policies for consistency with the Constitution
(b)     Review of the Policy Paper on Education and Training in Kenya (Sessional Paper No. 14 of 2012)
(c)      Review of Bills and policies within the Industrialization and Enterprise Development Sector, for which the Terms of Reference are currently under development.
(d)     Review of Sessional Paper on Devolution
(e)      Review of National Communication Policy
(f)      Review of Traditional Dispute Resolution Mechanism,
 
Legislation Review and Development
(g)      Consultative meetings with the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries and identify priority legislation for review/ development and functional analysis of the State Corporations in light of the fact that agriculture is now a devolved function.
(h)     Review of priority labour legislation for consistency with the Constitution.
(i)       Finalize the review of proposed amendments to the Public Service Commission Act, 2012
(j)       Review of the Legal Aid Bill, 2013
(k)     Review of the Basic Education Act, 2013
(l)       Stakeholder consultations on the Health Policy and Health Bill 2013
(m)    Review of victims of offences Bill, 2013
(n)     Review of Persons with Disability Bill, 2013
(o)     Review of legal and administrative framework to support traditional dispute resolution
 
Regulations and Administrative Procedures
(a)      Convene a meeting of technical officers from Constitutional Commissions to adopt terms of reference for joint operations and to develop a work-plan for joint operations.
(b)     Review and validation of concept paper to guide policy, legislation and administrative actions towards including issues of persons with disabilities in all aspects of life in Kenya
(c)      Finalization of the concept paper on the development of the public participation policy
(d)     County visits to the 47 counties to enable the commission follow-up on implementation of the Constitution.
 
ANNEXES
Annex 1: Action Points From CIC Forum with Governors and Senators Held From 25th -28th, July 2013

[1]The Kenya National Human Rights and Equity Commission, The National Land Commission, The Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission, The Parliamentary Service Commission, The Judicial Service Commission, The Commission on Revenue Allocation, The Public Service Commission, The Salaries and Remuneration Commission, The Teachers Service Commission, and The National Police Service Commission.
Action
Responsibility
Legislative Agenda
 
Send copies of Bills affecting Counties to Governors for their input and participation in the national legislative process
Senate
1.        Identify all legislation that hinder effective devolution and initiate amendments., e.g.,
Senate/NA/CIC/CRA
a.             The PFM Act (clauses that prejudice effective budgeting) 
b.             The CDF Act, 
Laws relating to devolved functions
Introduce a Bill to amend the County Government Act, 2012 to define the Senate’s oversight role in the budgeting process at the county levels 
Senate
Define the legislative mandate of the Senate (Senate has filed an Advisory Opinion at the Supreme Court)
Supreme Court
Develop legislation on Article 189(4) – to provide procedures for settling inter-governmental disputes by alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, including negotiation, mediation and arbitration
Senate
2.        The proposed Constitutional Amendments by the Senate should also address the role of governors and protection of county governments and give full legislative mandate to the senate.
Senate/ governors
Propose amendments to Article 95 of the constitution that gives power to National Assembly veto powers over Division of Revenue.
Detailed proposals to be shared with CIC before being translated in to amendment bill
3.        Identify and prioritize specific legislation to fast-track Devolution. 
Senate
Share all these proposals with the Council of governors and Counties
Governance
 
4.        Establish formal communication channels between Senate & Governors
 
a.             Amend the Standing Orders to allow the Senate receive messages from governors and county assemblies through the Speaker.
b.             Establish a Select Committee of Senators and Governors (Central platform) who can meet often to address devolution issues
c.             Amend the Standing Orders to create the County Investment Committee to facilitate proper of proper environment for private sectors.
Introduce a Bill on formal communication 
Establish the office of protocol in governors offices to facilitate meetings with potential investors and international guests
Governors
Establish County Steering Committees (in investments)
 
Establish an effective public and media relations department for the Council of Governors.
Governors
Establish mechanisms for Senate to check on laws being passed by the County Assemblies
 
Strengthen internal audit functions in county governments to ensure a proper check and balance system. (to strengthen fiscal and financial responsibilities)
 
Planning and Budgeting
 
5.        Governors should consider the development of Sessional Paper as blueprints spelling out each county’s development targets 
 
a.             Map the Counties development infrastructure to determine your baselines.
b.             Develop blue print policies based on the County visions for development  
Ensure that every country progresses in development
6.        Establish mechanisms for the Senate to 
Senators/ governors
a.             Participate in county budgeting processes
b.             Get opportunity to comment on the County Budgets for compliance check with the Law 
7.        Exercise their oversight role after expenditure approval by the county assemblies.
8.        Define indicators or deliverables or county impact assessment mechanisms to assess the extent to which devolution has or is being implemented
Council of Governors/CIC/CRA/TA
9.        Re-examine the concept of marginalized areas (as used to calculate revenue allocation)
CRA
10.     Establish structured mechanism of collaboration between the council of governors and senate. 
Senators/ governors
11.     Transfer of Functions
 
12.     Issue legal notice (gazettement) on what functions were devolved by March 4, 2013
TA 
13.     The Transitional Authority is creating rifts between the National Executive, County Executive and County Assemblies
 
14.     Organize a meeting between the national treasury, committee on devolved government, council of governors and the transitional authority to address issue of devolution
15.     Dissolve TA and work through inter governmental authority mechanisms
 
16.     Provide the readiness assessment reports prepared by TA (feed back) to the Governors.
TA
17.     Proposal, Transfer all functions and powers to the county governments. 
TA
a.             Resources follow functions and that is the only way county governments can be equipped to implement devolution.
18.     Capacities will be developed on the basis of functions transferred.
19.     Need to address;
 
a.             The ‘devolution of liabilities’
b.             The salaries of staff working at the county 
20.     Conflict between the national and county government
21.     Transfer all functions.
TA
a.             TA to finalize transfer functions by July13th
b.             TA Develop criteria with minimum criteria taking into account what has happened since TA carried out the assessment.
c.             Using the criteria, the counties will apply

d.             The TA will gazette the transfer of functions.




Annex 2:  Summary Report of CIC/ CIOC on the Implementation of the Constitution
1.        Discussion Areas
 
A.       Collaborating to Implement the Constitution of Kenya
 
(i)     Roles and Responsibilities of CIOC & CIC: Reflection on Achievements, Challenges & Recommendations
(ii)    Roles and Responsibilities of CIOC & CIC (perspective from CIC)
 
B.       The Legislative Agenda and Processes in the New Dispensation
 
(i)     New Parliamentary Procedure: Opportunities and Challenges
(ii)    Processing of Private Members Bills
(iii)  Role of Executive and cabinet in Legislative Process
 
C.       Integrated Matrix on Legislation to be Enacted by Parliament
 
2.        At the beginning of the retreat CIOC and CIC expressed the following expectations
 
(i)      Clarification of mandates, roles and responsibilities of CIOC and CIC
(ii)    Fostering of a good working relationship anchored on robust communication and consultation
(iii)   Understanding and jointly tackling of impediments to implementation of the Constitution including realization of a devolved system of government
(iv)   Understanding the timelines for required legislation and develop a joint framework to ensure quality and timely enactment of the legislation to implement the Constitution
 
3.        Based on discussion areas in 1., deliberations on challenges, opportunities and way forward were guided by the awareness that:
(i)                   First, the CIOC and CIC have a common objective of ensuring the implementation of both letter and the spirit of the Constitution, thus ensuring that the transformation envisioned by the people of Kenya is realized
(ii)                 Secondly, change is not an easy process and that therefore the onus is upon CIOC and CIC within the context of their respective mandates to work both individually and jointly to address emerging challenges
(iii)                Thirdly, the constitution is a radical document, and therefore implementation hiccups were expected. Framers of the constitution understood this, hence the creation of CIC, CIOC and other implementation institutions
(iv)                Fourthly, reflecting on the implementation journey brings out lessons learnt that can inform both CIOC and CIC in moving forward. These include;
The need to work jointly to realize constitutionalism across government
The need to foster open communication within a framework of mutual trust and respect even in the face of diametrically opposed views
EMERGING ISSUES, RESOLUTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES FROM THE RETREAT
Theme
Resolutions 
Responsibilities
1.        Consultative Mechanism/Forums 
(i)   Joint Meetings:
 
          Develop a schedule for regular consultative meetings to address issues of mutual concern
CIC/CIOC
          Have scheduled quarterly meetings (CIC & CIOC) to discuss the content of the reports and agree on actions/way forward
 
(ii)Proposed Agenda for initial meetings 
 
          Review CIC reports, pick out issues/challenges that have not been resolved and work out way forward.
 
          Continued prioritization and review of legislation 
 
          Curing Constitutional compliance issues in CDF 
 
(iii)                The Constitution has positioned CIOC to address impediments to implementation of the Constitution. Thus, CIOC can:
 
          Call upon other committees of parliament to account
 
          Call upon commissions to account
 
          Call executive to account 
 
(iv)                CIOC has therefore a constitutional obligation to defend the constitution of Kenya (and CIC as an institution)
 
2.        Processing of Legislation 
As provided for in the Constitution: 
 
      i)   CIOC engage AG, KLRC and CIC in the pre and post publication scrutiny of both public/executive generated and committee/individual member generated Bills as required in Art 261 
CIOC
     ii)   Ensure Public Participation in Processing of legislation including (Art 118)
 
   iii)   Robust engagement of public sector stakeholders such as the national treasury and the affected ministries, departments and agencies 
 
 
 
3.        Prioritization of Legislation 
      i)   Ensure policies precede law including addressing previous gaps in this regard. It is essential that policy development be participatory including the engagement of the legislature to inform the eventual development of law 
CIOC/CIC
     ii)   Agree with executive on timelines for development of legislation to ensure timely and quality of legislation
   iii)   Review of existing laws that fall short of the constitutional threshold; e.g.,  
          Political Parties Act and regulations
          Ethic and Anti Corruption Commission Act, and ensure full establishment of EACC 
          Fast track enactment of critical legislation such as the procurement and disposal act
          CDF 
   iv)   Develop legislation to give effect to:
           Provisions of the Constitution on dispute resolution between the two houses of parliament
          Progressive realization of the one third gender rule 
4.        Impediments to Implementation of a Devolved System of Government 
Section 4 of the 6th Schedule to the Constitution spells out what CIC should report to CIOC. CIOC should thus;
 
      i)   Offer oversight on devolution:
          Interrogate creation of devolution infrastructures.
          Ensure Devolution of powers and functions to counties is within the law.
          Look at the process of setting up institutions and structures and the seamless transfer of functions, etc.
     ii)   CIC & CIOC to develop a common consensus on 
          Laws on devolution that have been passed and their implementation status
          Laws required for effective implementation of devolution  
   iii)   CIOC and CIC work together to promote adherence to the Constitutional and Statutory provisions on devolution, for example;
          in the case of transfer of functions work together to see how this can be done as provided for in law particularly working pragmatically ensure Kenyans realize the objects of devolution  
          establish a framework that respects the Constitutional provisions which allows for consultation among elected leaders at the national and county levels  
5.        National Assembly and Senate 
      i)   There is need to address supremacy battles between national assembly and the senate as will otherwise impede implementation of the Constitution 
CIOC
     ii)   Procedurally giving effect to Art 110 and addressing the mediation in the bicameral house as per Art 112 and 113 – the houses invest in creating political goodwill 
 
   iii)   Promote engagement through the dispute resolution mechanisms provided for in the Constitution 
 
   iv)   Explore opportunities for working together as a bicameral house 
 
 
CIOC
ANNEX 3: ADVISORIES
A.       ADVISORY ON THE SENATE’S BILL AN AFFRONT TO DEVOLUTION 
The Senate, through the County Governments (Amendment)(No.2) Bill published on 16th August 2013 proposes to amend the County Governments Act, 2012 by inserting a new section to provide for the establishment of County Development Boards in each county. These Boards, which are chaired by the Local Senator “approve” all development plans and budgets before they are presented to the County Assemblies. The Bill if passed, would violate the letter and spirit of the Constitution. The Bill also contradicts recently passed devolution legislation such as the County Government Act, the Intergovernmental Relations Act and the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act, 2012 that were passed after extensive public consultation. To our knowledge no public consultations have occurred in relation to this latest Bill despite its far-reaching implications.
The principle role of any legislative assembly is that of enactment of legislation and oversight over public finances and state organs, while that of the Executive is implementation, coordination, management and administration of policies and legislation. The import of this is that the Parliament at the National level and County Assemblies at the County level have the oversight responsibility of scrutinizing and approving plans and budgets for the National government and County governments respectively, while the National Executive and County Executive have the responsibility of implementing projects in line with approved plans and budgetary allocations and reporting back to the legislative arms of the respective governments.  In giving Senators and MPs coordination and implementation roles in the County Governments, the Bill mixes these two responsibilities and muddles the separation of powers so clearly stated as one of the principles of devolution.
Secondly the National and County governments are distinct governments, and their roles and functions are clearly defined in the constitution. The County government comprises the County Executive and the County Assembly solely. The Constitution does not contemplate another superintendent body of a “national nature” that plans alongside the County government, and prefects the County governments, so as to ensure that the County governments are planning and budgeting well.  Where the County Executive plans and budgets badly, only the County Assembly can provide oversight over the County Executive. The Senators and MPs role is to enact legislation at the National level and provide corporate oversight over the finances of the Counties. This role is given to Senate corporately and does not grant individual Senators specific oversight responsibility over the Counties that elected them.  Indeed the exact boundaries of the corporate Senate oversight role needs to be defined urgently but whichever way it is defined, it must not usurp the oversight role of the County Assemblies.
As for intergovernmental consultation, where the County government needs to consult the national government, the mechanisms of such consultation, which respect the institutional integrity of each level of government, are already provided for in the Intergovernmental Relations Act. For the Bill, Senate to purport to create an extra supervisory organ outside of these two levels of government and which the local Senators, MPs and national government functionaries oversee individual Counties defeats this principle of distinctiveness.  The Bill also fails to promote the institutional integrity of each level of government as required by the Constitution. In one of the provisions of the Bill, the Chief Executive of the County, the Governor, is made the Secretary of the Board, which clearly betrays the view that the mover of the Bill has on the status of the County’s Chief Executive. Would the Senate imagine a situation where at the National level the National Chief Executive’s role was to serve as Secretary of some forum? 
Recognising that the object of devolution is to enhance the participation of the people in the exercise of the powers of the State and in making decisions affecting them, the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act, 2012, and the County Government Act setup elaborate citizen centred forums to inform the planning and budget making processes at the County level. These Acts recognise that it is the County government that consults its citizens and therefore the role of constituting and overseeing these forums is granted to the County government.  The Board proposed by the Bill would be a duplication of the functions of these already established forums and would in any event compromise the wider and more representative structures set out in the existing legislation.
An unstated reality is that these Boards will also cost money in sitting allowances and costs incurred in the administration and possible employment of staff of the Board in each county. It is not even clear who would be responsible for such expenditure since the Boards comprise, persons from the national and county governments.
The Senate is given the responsibility of protecting the constitution, and specifically to protect the interest of Counties. The intent of the Constitution was not that the Senate usurp the constitutional responsibilities of any organ of the County government as this Bill seeks to do. I urge the Senate to protect the Constitution and County Governments by rejecting this Bill
B.       PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 260 OF THE CONSTITUTION
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (CIC) issues the  following advisories to the people of Kenya regarding the Constitution of Kenya (Amendment) Bill published on 12th   July    2013. The Bill seeks to amend Article 260 of the Constitution,  by  deleting   the  offices  of  Members   of  Parliament,  Judges & Magistrates  and  Members  of County Assemblies  from  the  list  of  designated  State  Offices.
Having reviewed the Bill, CIC is of the opinion that:
1)       The proposed amendments require a referendum since they would fundamentally change many provisions of the Constitution.
2)       The Bill has not been processed in accordance   with Article 261 of the Constitution, which requires   that CIC be consulted in the development of Bills relating to the implementation of the Constitution.
3)       The reference to conferment of the   status   of State officers to Members of Parliament, Judges and Magistrates   and   Members   of County   Assemblies   does not in any way undermine the principle of separation of powers   among   the   three   arms of government.
4)       The proposed amendments substantively change the Constitution and   hence   affect the implementation of many other Articles in the Constitution.  Among the   Articles to be affected are:  1, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 88, 94, 95, 96, 99, 103, 127, 172, 184, 193, 194, 230, 233, 234, 235, 251, the Third Schedule to the Constitution among others.      This amounts to   indirectly   rewriting   the   Constitution, which has serious implications and therefore calls for discussions among all Kenyans.
5)       The consequence of the proposed amendment will occasion additional expenditure of public funds   in terms of the impact of the wage bill as explained under   paragraph 5 below
Below are our summarised discussions of the impact of the proposed amendment.
1. Effect of the Proposed Amendment on Chapter Six of the Constitution and the National Values and Principles of Governance
Article 10(2) of the Constitution entrenches good governance and integrity as national values. To ensure the attainment of these two values, Chapter6 sets the threshold for integrity and recognises the special application of this threshold to State officers being persons who  hold   senior   offices  in  government.
Given   that   Chapter   Six focuses   on   State   officers, an   amendment to   exclude   Judges, MPs and MCAs from being State officers will preclude them from the application of the Chapter thereby   reversing the gains made in entrenching good governance in legislative assemblies   and the Judiciary. Under Chapter   6 holders of dual citizenship cannot be   State   officers.  The amendments will   allow   dual citizens to be MPs and MCAs, therefore   undermining the intention of Kenyans to be represented by elected leaders who do not owe allegiance to other States
2. Undermining the sovereignty of the people
Article 1 of the Constitution relates to the sovereign power of the people of Kenya.  It proceeds to delegate this power to three “State organs” – which include “Parliament and the legislative assemblies in the county governments and the Judiciary and independent tribunals, the national executive and the executive structures in the county governments”. The removal of the status of  ‘State Officer’ from the members of these two arms of government will necessitate a re-definition of this Article and many   others, which use the term   “State” to refer to all three arms of government. This amounts to the re-writing of the Constitution.
Article 74 of the Constitution requires   that   State officers take   an   oath   of office before assuming an office, acting in or performing any functions of a State office. The Third Schedule to the Constitution outlines the national oaths and affirmation of various   State offices, including those   of   Judges   and   Members   of Parliament. An oath of office is not a mere ritual but a significant demonstration of the   acceptance   of the sovereignty of the people of Kenya and the recognition of the supremacy of the Constitution of Kenya.  This schedule would have to be deleted if these officers are no longer state officers since there is no constitutional basis for them to take the Oaths in the constitution. If Members of Parliament, Judges and   Magistrates and   Members   of County   Assemblies   do   not   pledge allegiance to the people and the Constitution, that is a matter   that   goes to the   heart   of Article 1 on   the sovereignty of the people   and therefore, as  per  Article 255(1) requires   a referendum.
3. Interference with the Functions and Independence of Chapter 15 Commissions
In recognition of the need to provide for a mechanism to   protect   the   sovereignty of the people, the Constitution established various commissions. The Commissions likely to be affected by the proposed amendments are:
(a) The Salaries and Remuneration Commission (SRC) is obligated under   Article 230(4) of the Constitution   to set and regularly review the remuneration and benefits of all State officers. The proposed amendment, if effected, will reduce   the   mandate of SRC. Whereas parliament may give additional mandates to chapter 15   commissions, it cannot take away or contradict their mandates without subjecting   the same to a referendum.
(b) The Ethics and Anti-corruption Commission (EACC) is established under Article 79 of the   Constitution   to ensure   compliance with, and   enforcement of the provisions of Chapter Six. The proposed amendments will   therefore   reduce   the   jurisdiction   of the mandate of EACC in respect of MPs, Members of County Assemblies and Judges and magistrates.
4.Constitutional Crisis in the Setting of Salaries of Judges and Magistrates, Members of Parliament and Members of County Assemblies
The Constitution provides for two categories of officers, namely State officers and other public officers. The SRC has the constitutional mandate to determine the salaries   of State officers and to advise   the   “national and county governments on   salaries   of   “all   other public   officers”.  The removal of the status of State officers from MPS, Judges and Magistrates and   MCAs will mean   that   they have the   status   of other   public officers.  This will mean that their salaries and benefits will be determined by the national and county governments   (Article 230   (4)   (b) thereby undermining the doctrine   of separation of powers.
If  on  the  other   hand   the  salaries  for  MPs  will  be set   by   the   Parliamentary  Service  Commission  there would   be  massive   conflict   of  interest   as  the   PARLS- COM  largely  comprises   of  MPs.  It is clear that   the people of Kenya did not intend to have MPs set their own salaries.
For the Judges and judicial officers, the JSC is constitutionally prohibited from   setting   their   salaries (Art 172   (1)(b)(i) so their   terms   will be set by the National Government. Not   only   would   this   conflict with the separation of powers but it would introduce a prejudice to County Governments when the Judiciary is called upon to resolve cases between   them   and the National `government.
5. Impact on the Wage Bill
In   the   performance of   its   functions, Article 230(5) of the Constitutional so requires   SRC to ensure fiscal sustainability of   the   total   public   wage bill.   Having senior public officers setting their own salaries will compromise this   constitutional intent. SRC is also required   to ensure a rational wage structure within   all State organs; the concept of State organs is clearly a unifying   thread   to this role of SRC. By having multiple organs fixing State officers’ salaries, the end result would   be   disharmony in   the   remuneration structure within   the public   service, the very situation the Constitution sought to avoid.
6. Effect of the Amendment on the Functions of Parliament
A key function of Parliament under Article 94(4) is to protect the constitution.  Parliament exercises oversight over State organs and State officers under   Article 94(4)(c), (5) and  (6) because it represents the people in constituencies. Consequently, the proposed amendment will reduce the oversight scope of the National Assembly and the Senate as it removes   some   of the officers from the jurisdiction of the National Assembly. This directly interferes with the functions of Parliament and therefore   requires   a referendum.
Conclusion
Any amendment to the Constitution must meet certain minimum standards, key among   them   being the protection of the Constitution and the sovereign   will of the   people   of Kenya, as opposed to   serving   the parochial interests of the  people  to  whom  the  people’s power  is  delegated   to;
(a)      Hence   there   is need   for   the   people of Kenya to reflect on the following:
 
(i)       What   is the   true   intention of this   amendment and   who   benefits   from   it?  Does   it in   any   way benefit the people of Kenya?  Does it accord with the exercise and protection of the Sovereignty of the people on which the Constitution is based?
(ii)     What is the motive behind including the Judiciary in this amendment?
(iii)    On interrogation of Article 255 of the Constitution, are the proposed amendments to be effected by a referendum or by a parliamentary initiative?
(iv)    The proposed amendments have been authored by the National Assembly and yet they include   third parties, namely   Judges, magistrates   and   Members of County   Assemblies.  What is the position of these State officers on   the   proposed amendments?   As holders of offices emanating from the Sovereignty of the people, the Kenyan people   are entitled   to know this.
The Constitution of Kenya 2010 is the people’s constitution. Unlike the 1963 constitution it must not be mutilated for the benefit of a few. Kenyans must remain   vigilant to ensure that they protect their constitution, for in it lies their hopes for a better Kenya.
CHARLES NYACHAE
CIC Chairperson
Annex 4-Summary of Ministries, Departments and State Agencies that Submitted Reports (April 2011-Dec 2012)
No.
Element / Variable
Other state organs
Commercial Enterprises
Regulatory Authorities
Commissions
Tertiary Institutions
Total State Organs
Total Ministries
Total Institutions
 
Baseline Information (MDAswith……)
1.         
Overall sectoral policies
9
1
5
1
2
18
24
42
2.         
Other policies in the sector
8
1
3
1
0
13
10
23
3.         
Identified laws they are responsible for (that Guide Implementation)
12
1
6
1
2
22
26
48
4.         
Have developed circulars 
1
 
2
 
1
 
4
8
5.         
Subsidiary legislation
6
0
4
1
1
12
6
18
6.         
Administrative instruments
9
1
5
1
2
18
12
30
 
Familiarization with constitution of Kenya, 2010(MDAs that have...)
7.         
Availed copies of constitution to staff
7
0
0
1
2
10
23
33
8.         
Uploaded soft copy of the constitution on the website
11
1
2
1
3
18
18
36
9.         
Held sensitization Workshop to staff
7
1
1
1
3
13
24
37
10.      
Isolated sector specific constitutional provisions 
5
0
3
1
1
10
12
22
11.      
Integrated the constitution into performance contracts
11
0
5
1
2
19
19
38
 
Policies Review/Development and Application – for consistency with the Constitution (MDAs that have…)
12.      
Reviewed policies 
11
1
4
1
3
20
20
40
13.      
Identified policies to be developed by Dec 2012
6
1
3
0
1
11
7
18
14.      
Identified policies to be developed by Dec. 2013
6
0
3
0
1
10
7
17
15.      
Identified policies to be developed Long term
4
0
3
1
1
9
7
16
 
Legislation: Review/Development and Application - for consistency with the Constitution (MDAs that have…)
16.      
Reviewed laws 
6
0
4
1
3
14
20
17.      
Identified laws to be developed/reviewed by Dec 2012
3
0
2
1
0
6
8
18.      
Identified laws to be developed/reviewed by Dec 2013
1
0
1
1
0
3
6
19.      
Identified laws to be developed/reviewed long term
2
0
3
0
0
5
6
 
Administrative Procedures Review/Development and Application - for consistency with the Constitution (MDAs that have…)
20.      
Reviewed/developed Administrative procedures 
8
0
1
3
16
13
29
21.      
Identified Administrative procedures to be reviewed/developed by Dec 2012
4
0
1
0
8
3
11
22.      
Identified Administrative procedures to be reviewed/developed by Dec 2013
1
0
1
0
5
3
8
23.      
Identified Administrative procedures to be reviewed/developed in long term
2
0
0
1
5
3
8
 
Ratified International Treaties and Conventions (MDAs that have……)
24.      
Ratified International Treaties
2
0
0
0
4
9
13
 
Change management Strategy (MDAs that have……)
25.      
Change management strategies
2
0
0
0
4
8
12
 
 
Annex 5: Cumulative Enacted Acts of Parliament, Policies and Administrative Procedures
2010
1.       Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution Act (No 9 of 2010)
2.       Animal Technicians Act (No. 11 of 2010)
3.       Competition Act (No.12 of 2010)
 
 
2011
21.    National Gender and Equality Commission Act (No. 15 of 2011)
4.       Commission of Administrative Justice Act (No. 23 of 2011)
22.    National Government Loans Guarantee Act (No. 18 of  2011)
5.       Commission on Revenue Allocation Act (No. 16 of 2011)
23.    National Payment System Act (No. 39 of 2011)
6.       Elections Acts Act (No. 24 of 2011)
24.    National Police Service Commission Act (No. 30 of 2011)
7.       Engineers Act (No. 43 of 2011)
25.    National Police Service Act (No. 11A of 2011)
8.       Environment and Land Court Act (No. 19 of 2011)
26.    Political Parties Act (No. 11 of 2011)
9.       Ethnics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act (No. 22 of 2011)
27.    Power of Mercy Act (No. 21 of 2011)
10.    Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (No. 9 of 2011)
28.    Price Control (Essential Goods) Act (No. 26 of 2011)
11.    Independent Offices Appointment Act (No. 8 of 2011)
29.    Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act (No. 32 of 2011)
12.    Independent Policing Oversight Authority Act (No. 35 of 2011)
30.    Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) Act, 2011 (No. 33 of 2011)
13.    Industrial Court Act (No. 20 of 2011)
31.    Salaries and Remuneration Commission Act (No. 10 of 2011)
14.    Judicial Service Act (No. 1 of 2011)
32.    Tourism Act (No. 28 of 2011)
15.    Kenya Citizenship and Immigration Act (No. 12 of 2011)
33.    Unclaimed Financial Assets Act (No. 40 of 2011)
16.    Kenya Citizens and Foreign Nationals Management Service Act (No. 31 of 2011) 
34.    Urban Areas and Cities Act (No. 13 of 2011)
17.    Kenya National Commission on Human Rights Act (No. 14 of 2011)
35.    Vetting of Judges and Magistrates Act (No. 2 of 2011)
18.    Limited Liability Partnership Act (No. 42 of 2011)
36.    Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Para-Professionals Act (No. 29 of 2011)
19.    Mutual Legal Assistance Act (No. 36 of 2011)
 
20.    National Construction Authority Act (No. 41 of 2011)
 
 
 
2012
59.    National Security Council Act (No. 23 of 2012)
37.    Appropriation Act, 2012 (No. 11 of 2012)
60.    National Transport and Safety Authority Act (No. 33 of 2012)
38.    Assumption of the Office of the President Act (No. 21 of 2012)
61.    Office of the Attorney-General Act (No. 49 of 2012)
39.    Breast Milk Substitutes (Regulation and Control) Act (No. 34 of 2012)
62.    Partnerships Act, 2012 (No. 16 of 2012)
40.    Cancer Prevention and Control Act (No. 15 of 2012)
63.    Petitions to the Parliament (Procedure) Act (No. 22 of 2012)
41.    Consumer Protection Act (No. 46 of 2012)
64.    Prevention, Protection and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and Affected Communities Act, 2012 (No. 56 of 2012)
42.    County Governments Act (No. 17 of 2012)
65.    Prevention of Terrorism Act (No 30 of 2012)
43.    Finance Act (No. 4 of 2012)
66.    Public Finance Management Act, 2012 (18 of 2012)
44.    Finance Act (No. 57 of 2012)
67.    Public Service Commission Act (No. 13 of 2012)
45.    Intergovernmental Relations Act (No. 2 of 2012)
68.    Public Service Superannuation Scheme Act (No. 8 of 2012)
46.    Kenya Defense Forces Act (No. 25 of 2012)
69.    Publication of Electoral Opinion Polls Act (No. 39 of 2012)
47.    Kenya Deposit Insurance Act (No. 10 of 2012)
70.    Statute Law Miscellaneous Act (No. 12 of 2012)
48.    Kenya Examinations Council Act (No. 29 of 2012)
71.    Supplementary Appropriation Act (No. 7 of 2012)
49.    Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service Act (No. 54 of 2012)
72.    Teachers Service Commission Act (No. 20 of 2012)
50.    Kenya School of Government Act (No. 9 of 2012)
73.    Transition to Devolved Government Act (No. 1 of 2012)
51.    Kenya School of Law Act (No. 26 of 2012)
74.    Treaty Making and Ratification Act (No. 45 of 2012)
52.    Land Act (No. 6 of 2012)
75.    Universities Act (No. 42 of 2012)
53.    Land Registration Act (No. 3 of 2012)
 
54.    Leadership and Integrity Act (No. 19 of 2012)
 
55.    Legal Education Act (No. 27 of 2012)
 
56.    National Authority for the Campaign against Alcohol and Drug Abuse Act (No. 14 of 2012)
 
57.    National Intelligence Service Act (No. 28 of 2012)
 
58.    National Land Commission Act (No. 5 of 2012)
 
2013
Amendment Acts
1.       County Governments Public Finance Management Transition Act (No. 8 of 2013)
2010
2.       Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development Act (No. 4 of 2013)
12.    Commissions of Inquiry (Amendment) Act, (No. 5 of 2010)
3.       The National Commission of for UNESCO Act (No. 5 of 2013)
13.    Witness Protection (Amendment) Act, (No. 2 of 2010)
4.       National Honours Act (No 11 of 2013)
14.    Finance Act, (No. 10 of 2010)
5.       National Government Co-ordination Act (No. 1 of 2013)
15.    2011
6.       Office of the Director of Public Prosecution Act (No. 2 of 2013)
16.    Capital Markets (Amendment) Act, (No. 37 of 2011)
7.       Public Health Officers Act (No. 12 of 2013)
17.    Central Depositories (Amendment) Act, (No. 38 of 2011)
8.       Supplementary Appropriation Act (No. 3 of 2013)
18.    Industrial Training (Amendment) Act, (No. 34 of 2011)
9.       Transition County Allocation of Revenue Act (No. 5 of 2013)
19.    Nurses (Amendment) Act, (No. 27 of 2011)
10.    Transition County Appropriation Act (No. 6 of 2013)
20.    Tea (Amendment) Act, (No. 4 of 2011)
11.    Division of Revenue Act, 2013
21.    Traffic (Amendment) Act, (No. 3 of 2011)
 
22.    Vetting of Judges and Magistrates (Amendment) Act, (No. 6 of 2011)
2012
30.    Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, (No. 51 of 2012)
23.    Capital Markets (Amendment) Act, (No. 35 of 2012)
31.    Seed and Plant Varieties (Amendment) Act, 2012 (No. 53 of 2012)
24.    Central Bank of Kenya (Amendment) Act, (No. 36 of 2012)
32.    Statute Law Miscellaneous (Amendment) Act, (No. 2 of 2012)
25.    Elections (Amendment) Act, (No. 31 of 2012)
33.    Traffic (Amendment) Act, (No. 37 of 2012)
26.    Elections (Amendment) No. 2 Act, (No. 32 of 2012)
34.    Traffic (Amendment) No. 2 Act, (No. 38 of 2012)
27.    Elections (Amendment) No. 3 Act, (No. 48 of 2012)
35.    Truth, Justice and Reconciliation (Amendment) Act, (No. 44 of 2012)
28.    Judicature (Amendment) Act, (No. 10A of 2012)
36.    Vetting of Judges and Magistrates (Amendment) Act, (No 43 of 2012
29.    Political Parties (Amendment) Act, (No. 50 of 2012)
 
2013
37.    Customs and Excise (Amendment) Act, (No. 10 of 2013)
38.    Presidential Retirement Benefits (Amendment) Act, (No. 9 of 2013)
39.    The County Allocation of Revenue Act, 2013
40.    The Appropriation Act, 2013
41.    The Constituency Development Fund (Amendment (Act, 2013
*The Acts in italics were developed in consultation with the Commission
BILLS PUBLISHED BETWEEN JULY – SEPTEMBER, 2013
Senate Bills 2013
No.
Bill
Date Published
Maturity date
1st Reading
2nd Reading
3rd
Assented to
Reading
1
The National Flag Emblems and Names Amendment Bill, 2013
5/7/2013
19/07/2013
-
-
-
-
2
The County Governments Amendment Bill, 2013
26/07/2013
9/8/2013
-
-
-
-
3
The County Governments (Amendment)(No 2) Bill, 2013
7/8/2013
-
 
 
 
 
Source: Kenya Law Report Website (www.kenyalaw.org) date 23/10/2013
National Assembly Bills – 2013
No.
Bill
Date Published
Maturity date
1st
2nd Reading
3rd
Assented to
Reading
Reading
1
The Matrimonial Property Bill, 2013
5/7/2013
18/07/2013
25/07/2013
-
-
-
2
The Marriage Bill, 2013
5/7/2013
16/07/2013
16/07/2013
-
-
-
3
The Election Campaign Financing Bill, 2013
5/7/2013
16/07/2013
16/07/2013
-
-
-
4
The Constitution of Kenya (Amendment) Bill, 2013
12/072013
26/07/2013
1/8/2013
-
-
-
5
The Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Amendment) Bill, 2013
12/072013
17/07/2013
17/07/2013
17/07/2013
18/07/2013
-
18/07/2013
6
The National Police Service Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2013
16/07/2013
23/07/2013
23/07/2013
-
-
-
7
The Kenya Information and Communications Amendment Bill, 2013
22/07/2013
5/8/2013
-
-
-
-
8
The Media Council Bill, 2013
22/07/2013
5/8/2013
-
-
-
-
9
The Wildlife Conservation and Management Bill, 2013
22/07/2013
5/8/2013
-
-
-
-
10
The Truth Justice and Reconciliation Amendment Bill, 2013
23/07/2013
5/8/2013
6/8/2013
-
-
-
11
The National Flag Emblems and Names Amendment Bill, 2013
26/07/2013
9/8/2013
-
-
-
-
12
The National Social Security Fund Bill, 2013
2/8/2013
-
-
-
-
-
13
Constitution of Kenya (Amendment)(No 2) Bill, 2013
30/07/2013
-
-
-
-
-
14
The Law Society of Kenya Bill, 2013 
26/07/2013
-
-
-
-
-
15
The Constituencies Development Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2013
2/8/2013
-
-
-
-
-
Source: Kenya Law Report Website (www.kenyalaw.org) date 23/10/2013
County Assembly Bills 2013
No.
Bill
Date Published
Maturity date
1st Reading
2nd Reading
3rd
Assented to
Reading
1
The Kiambu County Alcoholic Drinks Control Bill, 2013
30/07/2013
-
-
-
-
-
2
The West Pokot County Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013
21/08/2013
-
-
-
-
-
3
The Migori County Appropriation Amendment Bill, 2013
25/09/2013
-
-
-
-
-
4
The Kisii County Appropriation (Amendment) Bill, 2013
16/08/2013
-
-
-
-
-
5
The Mandera County Finance Bill, 2013
20/09/2013
-
-
-
-
-
6
The Mandera County Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013
13/09/2013
-
-
-
-
-

Source: Kenya Law Report Website (www.kenyalaw.org) date 23/10/2013
Annex 6: CIC Circular to County Governments on the Role of County Governments and County Public Entities in the Implementation of the Constitution: A Consultative Framework
CIC/CIRCULARS/1                                                                                                               12th  April,  2013
All Governors
All County Speakers
All County Clerks 
All County Secretaries
THE ROLE OF COUNTY GOVERNMENTS AND COUNTY PUBLIC ENTITIES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION: A CONSULTATIVE FRAMEWORK
The objective of this communication is to advise all county governments and county public entities on the modalities and process for ensuring full and faithful implementation of the Constitution of Kenya 2010.
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (CIC) is established under Section 5(1) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. The mandate of CIC is stipulated in Section 4(a), 5(6), and 15(d) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution Act 2010 and the Transition to Devolved Government Act.
The functions of CIC are to:
(a)             monitor, facilitate and oversee the development of legislation and administrative procedures required to implement the Constitution;
(b)            co-ordinate with the Attorney-General and the Kenya Law Reform Commission in preparing for tabling in Parliament, the legislation required to implement the Constitution;
(c)             report every three (3) months to the Constitutional Implementation Oversight Committee on:-
                            (i)           progress in the implementation of the Constitution;
                          (ii)           the preparation of the legislation required by the Constitution and any challenges in that regard;
                         (iii)           the process of establishing new commissions;
                         (iv)           the process of establishing the infrastructure necessary for the proper operation of each county including progress on locating offices and assemblies and establishment and transfers of staff;
                          (v)           the devolution of powers and functions to the counties;
                         (vi)           any impediments to the process of implementing the Constitution;
(d)            work with each Constitutional Commission to ensure that the letter and spirit of the Constitution is respected;
(e)             Exercise such other functions as are provided for by the Constitution or any other written law;
(f)             Monitor and oversee the transition process to devolved government and ensure that the system of devolved government is implemented effectively.
The mandate of CIC is further amplified by Article 249 (1) of the Constitution which sets out the objects of Constitutional Commissions and independent offices to include:
(a)      protecting the sovereignty of the people;
(b)     securing the observance by all State organs of democratic values and principles; and
(c)      promoting constitutionalism.
This circular is issued pursuant to the Commission’s mandate.
IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK
The Commission advises state officers and other public officers working with and for county governments and county public entities to undertake the following in the course of discharging their mandate:
(1)     Familiarize themselves with the Constitution  and its implications and ensure that:-
(a)       In the course of performing their duties the letter and spirit of the constitution is respected;
(b)     In discharging their legislative functions all  laws and administrative procedures that are developed  are consistent with the letter and spirit of the constitution;
(c)      Implementation of the Constitution and the national values and principles are integrated in the preparation and approval of county policies and plans; and, acquaint themselves with national policies and legislation relating to the implementation of the devolved system of government, the various functions in the Fourth Schedule and regulations made pursuant to the legislation.
(2)     Identify and develop county policies and plans for the effective discharge of their functions.
(3)     Identify, develop and review county government legislation necessary for the  regulation of and to facilitate the effective discharge of county government functions.  In undertaking this activity, county governments may consult the Kenya Law Reform Commission and the Commission.
(4)     Identify and develop relevant administrative procedures and guidelines for the operationalisation of county legislation for the effective discharge of their functions.
(5)     Identify and prepare relevant plans and policies for the management and exploitation of the county’s natural resources and the development and management of its infrastructure and institutions.
(6)     In determining the laws,  policies, plans and administrative procedures to be developed and reviewed, a county government should take into account the following:-
(a)      The constitutional provisions relating to the matter to be legislated;
(b)     National legislation and policy concerning the sector;
(c)      The existence of any international treaty ratified by Kenya relating to any matter concerning the sector (Article 2(5)(6));
(d)     The provisions relating to the fundamental rights and freedoms together with the national values and principles in the Constitution and the need to incorporate the requirement for adopting a human rights based approach to planning and programming;
(e)      The need to achieve progressive implementation of the socio-economic rights under Article 43 of the Constitution in appropriate legislation;
(f)      The objects and principles of devolution stipulated in Article 174 and Article 175 of the Constitution including:
(i)                                   Promotion of social and economic development and the provision of proximate, easily accessible services;
(ii)                                 Democratic exercise of power;
(iii)                                Participation of the people in the exercise of state powers and in decision making
(iv)                                Separation of powers;
(v)                                 Reliable sources of revenue for effective service effectively ;
(vi)                                Gender equity and equality
GUIDING VALUES AND PRINCIPLES
(7)     In discharging their functions  county governments  shall seek to ensure the observance of national values and principles, ethics and integrity and principles of public finance as enshrined in the Constitution, these include:
(i)           Participation of the people;
(ii)         Equity, inclusiveness, human rights, social justice, equality , non-discrimination and protection of the marginalized;
(iii)        The principle of gender equity and regional balance in the consideration of opportunities;
(iv)        Sharing and devolution of power;
(v)         Good governance, integrity, transparency and accountability
(vi)        Sustainable development;
(vii)      The principles on leadership and integrity in Chapter 6 of the Constitution; and
(viii)     The principles of fairness, prudence, clarity and the need for fiscal responsibility in the management of public resources in Chapter 12 of the constitution.
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
(8)     In determining and generating county legislation, plans and policies every county government and every institution involved in the devolved system of government should ensure that the process leading to the determination of the legislation is undertaken in a participatory and transparent manner. Public participation includes one or a combination of any of the following:-
(i)           Structured process of gathering views  of the public during policy formulation or preparation of legislation;
(ii)         Timely access to information, data, documents, and other information relevant or related to policy formulation and implementation;
(iii)         Reasonable access to the process of formulating and implementing policies, laws, and regulations, including the approval of development proposals, projects and budgets, the granting of permits and the establishment of specific performance standards;
(iv)         Protection and promotion of the interest and rights of minorities, marginalised groups and communities and their access to relevant information;
(v)         Stakeholder input through meetings and/or correspondence;
(vi)        Dissemination of draft  legislation to the public for discussion through various media outlets;
(vii)      Focused  debate on policy or draft  Bill;
(viii)     Any other credible process of considering  and incorporating public views;
(9)     In reviewing policies and legislation  the  following criteria should also be taken into account:-
(a)          The extent to which the public participated effectively in generating the policy or legislation;
(b)          The consistency of proposed legislation, policies and plans with the letter and spirit of the constitution;
(c)          The adequacy and sufficiency of the legislation and administrative procedures in facilitating implementation of devolved system of government;
WORKING WITH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
(10)  The Constitution and laws relating to devolved government call for cooperation and consultation between the governments. Every county government shall, to this end, take measures to facilitate consultation and cooperation between itself and another county government and, between itself and the national government to ensure effective and optimal delivery of services. 
CHANGE MANAGEMENT
(11)  The Constitution of Kenya is a transformative instrument that institutionalized the devolved system of governance. It therefore calls for a fundamental paradigm shift which requires a strategy to guarantee devolution of power, resources and services and the attendant capacity of counties to deliver services.
(12)  CIC recommends that each county government develops a governance and management strategy outlining how each county plans to effect the new dispensation under the Constitution and which is necessary for the realization of the devolved system of government.
(13)  Each county government shall ensure that it trains its staff to internalize the objectives of the implementation of the Constitution and the devolved system of government. As part of its mandate of ensuring that the letter and spirit of the Constitution is respected, CIC undertakes to review the structures and systems, including the human resource ones such as training guidelines developed and being applied by a county so as to ensure compliance with the Constitution.
WORKING WITH THE CIC AND REPORTING OBLIGATIONS
(14)  The Transition to Devolved Government Act requires county governments to prepare a transition plan and progress reports on implementation of the devolved system of government.  To discharge this statutory obligation every county government shall designate a unit charged with the responsibility to oversee the activities necessary for  the implementation of the Constitution.
The implementation unit shall, among other things:
(a)      Coordinate and facilitate with different units of the county governments to ensure implementation of and compliance with the Constitution;
(b)     Facilitate the development, realization and monitoring of the transition implementation plans, including county profiles, the structures and systems, including the decentralized units which they need for their realization and, a monitoring and evaluation framework;
(c)      Liaise with CIC and TA in facilitating the transition to devolved government; and
(d)     Coordinate the preparation and submission periodic progress reports on the implementation of the Constitution as stipulated in Section 16 (3) of the Transition to Devolved Government Act.
(15)  Pursuant to Section 16 of the transition to devolved government Act each county government is required to submit a Transition Plan to TA and CIC, the Summit and the Council of Governors. Within 60 days from date of the assumption of office by governors (27 March, 2013) each county government shall submit transition plans indicating:
(a)      The priority policies, laws, regulations, implementation frameworks and administrative procedures to be developed and enacted by county governments indicating the timeframe for each activity;
(b)     Projected fiscal, human resource, documentation strategy and infrastructural requirements, together with the decentralised units and structure of the executive arm of government they have settled on
(c)      A broad framework for the implementation and monitoring of their system of governance and management, including for the implementation of each of the functions in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution
(d)     Projected service delivery plan for the discharge of county government functions as listed in the fourth schedule
(16)  Each county government shall submit its progress report on a quarterly basis within five days of the end of each quarter. For the purposes of this communication, the first quarter ends on the 30th  of June 2013.
CIC will monitor, facilitate and oversee the development of policies, legislation and administrative processes, systems and structures to required for the county governments to implement the Constitution.
CHARLES NYACHAE
Chairperson
Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution
 



Annex 7: Chairperson and Commissioners of the Commission
Mr. Charles Nyachae
Chairperson
 
Dr. Elizabeth Muli
Vice-Chairperson. Convener of the Executive and Security Thematic Team
 
Dr. Imaana Kibaaya Laibuta
Convener of the Judiciary and Constitutional Commissions Thematic Team
Prof. Peter Wanyande
Convener of the Devolved Government Thematic Team
 
Mr. Kamotho Waiganjo
Convener of the Public Finance Thematic Team
 
Ms. Catherine M. Mumma
Convener of the Bill of Rights and Citizenship Thematic Team
 
Dr. Ibrahim M. Ali
Convener of the Land and Environment Thematic Team
 
Mr. Philemon Mwaisaka, EBS,SS
Convener of the Public Service and Leadership Thematic Team
 
 
 
Dr. Florence Omosa
Convener of the Representation of the People & the Legislature Team
 
Annex 8: Senior Management Team
Ms. Lily Koros
Ag. CEO/Director Management Services
 
Mrs. Esther Kodhek
Director of Programmes
 
Mr.Kennedy Malinda
Supply Chain Management
 
Mr. Khalid Salim
Head of Communications
 
Mr. Mugita Gesongo
Head of Monitoring and Evaluation
 
Ms. KabaleTache
Head of Human Resource
 
Mrs. Elizabeth K. Obiero
Principal Programme Officer, Organisational Development & Institutional Strengthening
 
Mr. James Wagalla
Principal Programme Officer, Organisational Development & Institutional Strengthening
 
Ms. Doreen Muthaura
Principal Programme Officer, Legislative Drafting
 
Ms. Sophia Sitati
Senior Programmes Officer, General Thematic Area Support
 
Mrs. Christine Njeru Kuria
Senior Programmes Officer-Citizenship and Bill of Rights Thematic Area
 
Ms. Caroline Gaita
Senior Programmes Officer, Judiciary and Constitutional Commissions Thematic Area
 
Mr. Felix Oganga
Head of Finance
 
Mr. Bernard Cherutich
Head of Accounts
 
Ms. Catherine Muia
Head of Records
 
Mr. Timothy Kariuki
Senior Programmes Officer,
 
Mrs. Margaret Akutekha
Head of Audit
 
Mr. Fredrick Oromo
Senior Supply Chain Management Officer
 
Ms. Edith C. Cheramboss
Senior Programmes Officer, Public Service and Leadership Thematic Area
 
Ms. Mary Goretti Orwa,
Senior Programme Officer , The Representation of the People and Legislature Thematic Area
 
Ms. Ruth Muthui
Senior Programme Officer, Judiciary and Constitutional Commissions Thematic Area
 
Mr. Abdirazak Abdi,
Senior Programmes Officer, Land and Environment Thematic Area
 
Ms. Valerie Nangidi
Senior Programmes Officer, Devolved Government Thematic Area
 
Lucy Gaithi,
Senior Programme Officer, M&E
 
Kephas Okach,
Senior Programme Offier, M&E
 
Mr. Jeremiah Nyakundi
Senior Programme Officer



