
				Page: 2156GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5689
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED FUEL FILLING  STATION ON PLOT L.R NO. 4885/124 AND 4885/125 IN RIRONI KIKUYU, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Astrol Petroleum Company Limited) is proposing to set up a fuel filling station on Plot L.R No. 4885/124 and 4885/125 Rironi Kikuyu, Kiambu County
The proposed project will contain the following components: underground storage tanks with vents and breathers, oilinterceptor and septic tank, fuel dispensers under steel canopy, service bays such as tyre centre, car wash and repair shop, drive way and car park, management offices, compound work and walls.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures 


Occupational health and safety


Environmental Management Plan and a workable and cost effective implementation plan be put in place during the construction and operations phases.
All activities be carried out in ensuring better working conditions and compliance with the legal requirements.


Waste generation


The materials that cannot be re-used should be disposed of at designated sites as stipulated in the environmental laws.
Proper waste disposal.
Provision of waste collection bins for easier waste segregation and disposal of waste.


Rocks from excavation, concrete and block off-cut chips


The soil excavated will be re-used in filling and leveling the foundation which should be minimal
All the un-usable component be transported and disposed in designated areas.

 

Soil erosion and degradation


The soil excavated will be re-filling the foundations
Control earthworks to avoid interfering with land not to be built upon.

 

Construction materials


Use of standard materials already certified by the government.
Comply with the building code on structural configurations and materials to be used.


Visual enhancement


Use of colors and structures that enhance visual façade.
Paint entire walls and external entrances to render well to general neighborhood.


Hydrology, drainage and ground water resources


Storm water to be directed into the natural  drains.
Properly design drainage structures to prevent silting and soil erosion.


Water resources


Control usage of water to minimize wastage.
Install toilets flush with low volume cisterns and a long and short flush and push taps.
Rain water harvesting to prevent over dependence on already limited available water resources.


Biological resources


Landscaping and planting of fast growing trees, shrubs, grasses and ornamental flowers where possible.


Conflict resolution


Public consultation and interview.
No interference with the any structure or resource of public and cultural interest to the community.
The project will also create employment opportunities during construction and operations phases.


Occupational health and safety regulations


Awareness training sessions focusing on environmental, health and safety regulations, requirements of the Environmental Management and Coordination Act.
Prepare health and safety plan.
Adhere to the general matters, stipulated health, safety and workforce welfare regulations.
Provide workforce with safety wearing gear and enforce their use.


Emergencies and accident occurrences


Provision of personal protective clothing.
Protective clothing and safety gadgets to be provided to the workers and visiting clientele.
Emergency response plan.


Records of accidents


Records on number and nature of accidents and injuries to be maintained.


Air, dust and noise pollution


Dust protection gadgets to be provided to the workers.
Carry out off-site maintenance of trucks and machinery.


Social security and safety


Construction of perimeter fence.
Install basic security facilities such as street lighting and security alarms.


Road safety and access


Erection of warning signs and directions
Supervise movements of trucks and machinery at all times.


General risks and hazards


Building design schedules to comply with local authority specifications of building regulations.
Comply with Ministry of Work’s code regulations for earthquakes.
Comply with Kenya building code regulations for fire hazards.
Certification of construction materials.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692057         National Environment Management Authority.

