
				Page: 47GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  150
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED DENMARK SERVICE STATION, AT KISII – MIRUKA AND KISII – DARAJA MBIRI ROADS JUNCTION, WITHIN KISII TOWN IN KISII COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Dennis Magare Makori, is proposing Denmark Service Station, at Kisii – Miruka and Kisii – Daraja Mbiri Roads Junction within Kisii Town in Kisii County. The project  highlights  include: Canopy over  the  pumps,  sales  office,  a  restaurant,  a  store,  underground fuel  tanks,  compressor/generator,  car  wash,  drive  ways,  walkways,  interceptor  tank  and washrooms.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Project Activities/ Environmental Effect 


Mitigation / Enhancement Measures 


Air pollution caused by material and equipment transport, earthworks, material extraction, material crushing/screening/ piling,
 


Prohibit idling of vehicles at site during excavation.
Spraying water on dusty materials/workplace.
Regular maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Enclosing the site where possible.
Workers should be provided with dust masks.


Land, water and soil degradation/ contamination caused by oil and chemical spillage by machines and vehicles
 


Proper storage, handling and disposal of oil and wastes from machinery.
Discourage servicing of machinery and vehicles on site except on containment area.
Machinery should be well maintained to prevent oil leaks.
Construct oil receptor tank.
Contractor should have a designated area where maintenance is carried out and that is protected from rain water.
All oil products should be stored in a site store and handled carefully.


Site Clearance and excavation leading to soil erosion and vegetation loss
 


Remediate contaminated soil.
Landscaping.
Ensure management of excavation activities.
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures where necessary.
Proper disposal of excavated loose soil.


Fire risks due to un-controlled disposal of spent cigarettes remains, use of fire for domestic cooking and spillage of diesel/petrol.
 


To enhance health and safety preparedness among workers.
Ensure equipment is in good working condition.
Put up emergency response contracts.
Put up Emergency Response Procedures notification instructions.
Put up simple instructions on how to handle fires, products spills LPG incidents, armed robbery and product contaminations.


Worker camping, site office operations and actual construction works health and safety risks
 


Ensure proper waste collection and disposal.
Provide first aid kit at site.
Sensitize residents/workers on environmental management.
Eliminate breeding of mosquitoes.
Workers should be trained on occupational health and safety and first Aid administration.
Train staff on petroleum product handling.
Sensitize workers on HIV and AIDS.
Provide Personal Protective Equipment.
Train workers on personal safety and how to handle equipments and machines.
A well stocked first aid kit shall be maintained by a qualified personnel Report any accidents/ incidences and treat and compensate affected workers Provide sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences.


Machine and equipment operations leading to noise pollution
 


Construction activities to be restricted to daytime.
Workers in the vicinity involved in high level noise to wear respective safety and protective gear i.e. earplugs.
Low noise selection of machinery.
Enclose the site.
Use low noise equipment.
Keep plant equipment well greased.
Workers to wear ear muffs if working in noisy section.
Management to ensure that noise from the residents is kept within reasonable levels.


Visual intrusion
 


Use of commercial bill boards to keep construction activities out of sight from the immediate neighborhood.
Expedition of construction as far as is technically viable so as to minimize adverse visual impact.
Landscaping and gardening to restore biodiversity and aesthetic property of the project.


Poor living standards of workers at the site camps


Encourage residents to maintain high standards of personal cleanliness; Keep the premises and its environment (surroundings) clean always.


Generation of solid wastes


Construction debris should be collected by a licensed private contracted waste collection company.
Excavation waste should be re-used or backfilled.
Waste generated should be collected by a privately contracted waste collection company and the contractor should ensure the construction of a central waste collection point with bulk storage facilities.
The site should have waste receptacles with bulk storage facilities at convenient points to prevent littering during occupation.


Fuelling of vehicles leading to solid waste generation, possible accidents, noise and air pollution
 


Proper waste management practices including reduction at source, recycle and re-use of solid wastes; treatment of waste waters prior to release to natural water or land surfaces.
Proper maintenance of floors to avoid slipping/falls; avoiding fuel spillage.
Installation of safety communication media such as sign posts and installation of speed limiting pumps for petrol access routes.
Encourage vehicle owners to ensure proper vehicle maintenance; dispensing low lead fuel.


Increased soil erosion due to reduced infiltration by impermeable surface and collection of directed runoffs.


Take appropriate soil conservation measures including embankments, runoff breaking systems and proper distribution of culverts.


Leakages from underground fuel storage and spillage during handling


Use properly maintained hoses and fittings.
Make the cement screeds in all the chambers using water proof material.
Install a monitoring well next to the tanks to check on leaks.
Use water finding dipstick and/ or a hydrometer to check on density/ specific gravity.
Ensuring no spills during refilling and/or when offloading the fuel.


Solid waste generation
 


Waste generated should be collected by a privately contracted waste collection company and the contractor should ensure the construction of a central waste collection point with bulk storage facilities. The site should have waste receptacles with bulk storage facilities at convenient points to prevent littering during occupation.


Fire risks
 


Fire fighting drills carried out regularly.
Fire fighting emergency response plan.
Ensure all firefighting equipment is regularly maintained, serviced and inspected.
Fire hazard signs and directions to emergency exit route to follow and assembly point in case of any fire incidence.


Occupational health and safety risks
 


Train workers on personal safety and disaster preparedness.
A well stocked first aid kit shall be maintained by a qualified personnel.
Report any accidents / incidences and treat and compensate affected workers.
Provide sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences which should be kept clean.
Conduct Annual Health and Safety Audits.


Water utility consumption and generation of waste water
 


Avoid unnecessary toilet flushing.
Promptly detect leaking taps and repair them.
Turn off taps when not in use.
Install water conserving taps that turn of immediately when water is not in use.
Install a discharge water meter in the premises to check on total water use and for billing purposes.
Use special tool to do skimming.
Install spill control kit next to the oil interceptor during skimming.


Waste water generation
 


Waste water should empty to the septic tank via well laid sewage pipes Conduct inspections for sewer pipe blockages or damages and fix them.
Empty septic tank whenever its full by a licensed exhauster services.


Over-use of electrical power
 


Erect a meter in the premises to check on total kilowatts used and for billing purposes.
Apply for connection from Kenya Power Switch off light that are not in use.
Use of energy conserving bulbs/tubes.
Use of natural light for lighting purposes Use natural ventilation from windows and doors and avoid using Air Con that use electricity.
Provide a standby generator in the premises in cases power goes out Switch off lights in the offices at night.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kisii County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8448733         National Environment Management Authority.

