
				Page: 21GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  62
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
EXTENSION OF TERM OF OFFICE FOR TASKFORCE MEMBERS OF BARINGO PEACE AND SECURITY
IT IS notified for public information that the Governor, Baringo County Government, in exercise of the powers vested in him under section 30 (2) of the County Governments Act  extends  the term  of Baringo County Peace Taskforce to serve with effect from 14th  October, 2015, for a period of 30 working days and  a reporting period  within three months thereafter.

Name


Position


Gen. D. R. C. Daudi Tonje


Chairman


Wesley Chemjor


Member


Lt.-Col. (Rtd.) Josiah Kimosop


Member


Francis Lemangi


Member


Veronica Kipsang


Member


Kimosop Meja Kimunyan


Member


Rev. John Nambair


Member


Daniel Kamuren Tuitoek (Dr.)


Member


Stellah Kereto


Member

Terms of Reference 
Terms of reference for the Taskforce are:
(a) Carry out research and consultations on cause of cattle rustling and come up with comprehensive and practical recommendations on the matters of security.
(b) Establish historical background of cattle rustling in Baringo with a view to come up with reversal recommendation.
(c)  Analyze social and economic activities to   identify both short and  long  term  strategies  to  deter  cattle  rustling  related activities.
(d) Obtain information from stakeholder groups i.e. Sub-County Administrators, Ward  Administrators, Chiefs,  peace groups, political leaders, NGO’S etc. with a view to recommending effective resolution
(e)  Propose   short   and   long   term   strategies   on   restoration, reparation and settlement of losses to the aggrieved people
The Taskforce shall be reporting to the Deputy Governor and will submit the final report to the Governor.
Joint Secretariat to the Taskforce

Name


Position


Abdushakur Khatib Lendapana


Researc /Joint Secretary


Nelson K. Chemwei


Joint Co-ordinator


Dorah J. Sawe


Joint Secretary


County legal office representative


Legal Advisor

BENJAMIN C. CHEBOI,
MR/8448948                                      Governor, Baringo County.

