
				Page: 1150GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3303
TASKFORCE ON REVIEW OF VARIOUS CONCERNS BY RESIDENTS OF KIMWARER AREA IN RELATION TO FLOUSPAR MINING
IT IS notified for general information that the Cabinet Secretary for Mining has constituted a Taskforce as hereunder:
Membership:
Paul Nyamodi                               Chairperson
Alice Kaudia (Dr.)                         Member
Samantha Argwings-Kodhek (Ms.)   Member
Herbert Musoga (Dr.)                    Member
Catheriana J. Chirchir                    Member
Luka Kipkemoi Sawe                    Member
Richard Ruto Kirui                        Member
Philimon T. Cheruiyot                   Member
David Kipruto Seurei                    Member
Ibrahim Lithome                           Joint Secretary
Raymond Mutiso                          Joint Secretary
Mandate:
To conduct a comprehensive review of the license area under which Kenya Fluorspar Company Limited operates, investigate claims by the locals on unfair treatment by the company,  investigate circumstances under which compensation alleged funds were diverted to other uses by past and present administrators and politicians, explore ways of compensating the residents for their deprived land, advice the government on alternative ways of sorting out the injustice and to provide a written report of its findings to the Cabinet Secretary for Mining with clear matrix on recommended actions and estimated costs.
Terms of reference—
(a) to conduct desk research into circumstances that led to commencement of mining operations in Kimwarer;
(b) to conduct field research in the area with a view of establishing concerns by locals in relation to fluorspar mining in the area;
(c)  to establish the exact number of households and the extent to which owners of land (9,070 acres) where the operations were set were compensated for their land;
(d) to establish the number of households that were directly affected by way of deprivation of land by the commencement of mining and processing operations;
(e)  to establish the economic and social benefits of the fluorspar operations versa vis the negative effects (if any) of the mining operations;
(f)   to establish the wishes of the people on the ground on how to resolve the constant friction with the company operating in the area;
(g) to recommend ways of correcting historical injustices melted on the people (if any) pursuant to relevant laws on community and private ownership of property;
(h) to present a written report to the cabinet secretary for Mining within ninety (90) days of this appointment with clear recommendations, matrix of timelines and approximate cost for the recommended approach/approaches; and
(i)   any other function as may be directed by the Cabinet Secretary in writing
Deliverables:
(a) A compilation of the Taskforce meeting summaries and special studies;
(b) An implementation matrix;
(c)  A written report describing the findings of the Taskforce and its recommendations.
(d) An oral presentation to the Cabinet Secretary for Mining of the summary findings and recommendations of the Taskforce.
Meetings and procedures:
(a) The Taskforce will begin activities on 11th May, 2015. The Chair will announce the date, time, and location of each meeting in advance. After the initial meeting, the Taskforce will plan further sessions at Kimwarer and the larger Elgeiyo area as may be necessary. The Taskforce report is due to the Cabinet Secretary for Mining on or before 10th August, 2015.
(b) The Taskforce will receive allowances as stipulated in various circular from the salaries and remuneration commission, Members are also entitled to travel and accommodation expenses while conducting field work.
(c)  Support services for the Taskforce shall be provided by the Ministry of Mining.
Dated the 4th May, 2015.
NAJIB BALALA,
Cabinet Secretary for Mining.

