
				Page: 1471GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4087
TASKFORCE ON SENTENCING
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Chief Justice has appointed a sentencing taskforce consisting of the following—
Justice Mbogholi Msagha—Judiciary—(Chairperson)
Sarah Kinyanjui  (Dr.)—UoN Mombasa Campus—(Vice-Chairperson)
Members: 
Justice Fred Ochieng—Judiciary
Lady Justice Jessie Lessit—Judiciary
Tripsisa Wamae—Judiciary
Charles Mbogo—Judiciary
Abdul Omar—Office of the Chief Justice
Berveline Ongaro—Office of the Deputy Chief Justice
Fred Musyimi—Probation and After Care Services
Vincent Monda—Office of the Director of Public Prosecution
Robert Kaei—Kenya Prison Service
Samuel Nyabengi—National Police Service
Katra Sambili—National Council on the Administration of Justice
Grace Okumu—Law Society of Kenya
Janet Munywoki—Legal Resources Foundation
Felix Kyalo—International Development Law Organization
Jeptum Bargoria—United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Njeri Thuku—Judiciary Training Institute
Justice Joel Ngugi—Judiciary Training Institute
Christine Ochieng—Federation of Women Lawyers in Kenya
Timothy Bryant—Christian Legal Education Aid and Research
Secretariat:
Atieno Odhiambo—Judiciary
Ken Ogutu—Judiciary Training Institute
Terms of Reference:
1.  The terms of reference of the taskforce are to—
(a) review past sentencing patterns, policies and outcomes.
(b) report on how to reduce unwarranted disparity, increase certainty and uniformity; and promote proportionality in sentencing.
(c)  create a roll out plan for suggested interventions; including educating and engaging members of the public and other stakeholders on the sentencing system and its effectiveness.
2.  In the performance of its functions, the Taskforce—
(a) shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the taskforce shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice, consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions;
(b) may use official reports of any previous studies, policies and legislation relevant to its mandate;
(c)  shall conduct public hearings and open forums and receive views from members of the public and receive oral and written submissions from any person with relevant information; and
(d) may carry out or cause to be carried out such studies or researches as may inform the taskforce on its mandate.
3.  The taskforce shall regulate its own procedure.
4.  The taskforce shall prepare and submit to the Chief Justice, its work plan and progress report within three weeks of its appointment.
5.  The Secretariat of the Taskforce shall be based at the Judiciary Training Institute.
Dated the 5th June, 2014.
WILLY MUTUNGA,
Chief Justice/President, Supreme Court of Kenya,

