
				Page: 1710
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5244
THE WATER ACT
(No. 8 of 2002)
NZOIA WATER SERVICES COMPANY LIMITED (NZOWASCO)
PUBLIC CONSULTATION ON REGULAR TARIFF
NOTICE is given to the general public in the area of Lake Victoria North Water Services Board, which has a license to provide water services in the counties of Kakamega, Vihiga, Busia, Bungoma, Trans Nzoia, Uasin Gishu, parts of Egeyo Marakwet and Nandi counties, that it has applied to the Water Services Regulatory Board for a regular tariff review for its agent, Nzoia Water Services Company Limited, for the period 2015/2016 to 2019/2020.  The Nzoia Water Services Company Limited serves Kitale within Trans Nzoia County and Bungoma, Kimilili and Webuye within Bungoma County and Amagoro, Angurai, Malaba and Amukura service areas within Busia County. The Lake Victoria North Water Services Board proposes an upward tariff review to enable Nzoia Water Services Company Limited to attain full cost recovery, undertake minor investments and meet conditions for improving water service delivery to customers. The Lake Victoria North Water Services Board proposes to adopt rising block tariffs for all consumer categories except water kiosks. Details of the current tariff and the proposed tariff can be obtained from www.lvnwsb.go.ke or at the offices of Nzoia Water Services Company Limited located at Webuye Town behind Masinde Muliro University of Science and Technology Webuye Campus. Written comments on improvements on service delivery and/or justified objections to the upward tariff review should be addressed to the Managing Director, Nzoia Water Services Company Limited, P.O. Box 1010–50205, Webuye or info@nzoiawater.or.ke or info@lvnwsb.go.ke. The closing date for such comments shall be on 14th August, 2015. A public consultation meeting shall be held on 7th  August, 2015 at Elegant Hotel, Bungoma Town, Bungoma County starting at 9.00 a.m. All members of the public in the area of supply of Nzoia Water Services Company Limited are invited to attend.
Dated the 1st July, 2015.
GEORGE KWEDHO,
Chief Executive Officer,
MR/7796641 Lake Victoria North Water Services Board (LVNWSB).
 


