
				Page: 2517GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  4620
ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICE REFORMS STEERING COMMITTEE (PRSC)
It is notified for the general public that the Cabinet Secretary for Interior and Co-ordination of National Government has established a Committee to be known as the Police Reforms Steering Committee (PRSC).
This is in pursuant to section 126 and 132 of the National Police Service Act 2011 (amendment 2015) on mandate of the Cabinet Secretary in Police Reforms. The role of the Cabinet Secretary is to provide policy direction, co-ordinate, monitor and evaluate performance, and ensure continuity and sustainability of reforms in the National Police Service. This committee shall provide a ministerial and multi-sectoral framework for co-ordination of various reforms institutions under the Ministry functions, key stakeholders, bilateral co-operation’s and basket funding arrangement for reforms in the National Police Service.
The committee shall comprise—
Principal Secretary–Interior— (Chairman)
Members:
Principal Secretary, National Treasury.
Secretary Internal Security
Office of Attorney-General and Department of Justice
Office of Director of Public Prosecution
Inspector-General, National Police Service
Deputy Inspector-General, Kenya Police Service
Deputy Inspector-General, Administration Police Service
Director of Criminal Investigations
Chairman, National Police Service Commission
Chairman, Independent Policing Oversight Authority
Representative, Kenya Private Sector Alliance
Representatives, Development Partners supporting Police Reform under Bilateral Co-operation and or Basket Fund arrangement.
Representative, Organization Responsible for Police Reforms Basket Fund Management .
Joint Secretaries.
Secretary, National Administration
Co-ordinator, Police Reforms
Terms of reference
(i)       Ensure implementation of reforms in the National Police Service is in line with the Constitution of Kenya 2010, Medium Term Plan II (2013 -2017) and Policy directions as may be issued by the Ministry.
(ii)     Provide strategic policy direction, co-ordinate, monitor performance and ensure continuity and sustainability of reforms in the National Police Service.
(iii)    Oversight implementation of Police Reforms Program Document (2015-2018), Police Reforms Modernization Plan (2014-2017) and National Police Service Transformation framework.
(iv)    Oversee, co-ordinate, monitor and evaluate implementation of police reform programmes supported under multi-sectoral and bilateral cooperation.
(v)     Review legislative, policy and institutional environment for reforms and propose necessary changes and amendments that may be appropriate for improved delivery of policing services.
(vi)    Approve Police Reforms priority programmes and activities to be funded through bilateral co-operation and Basket Fund arrangement.
(vii)  Receive and approve expenditure report on Police Reform resources donated by Development Partners to the Basket Fund under UNODC management.
(viii) Mobilize resources from National Treasury and development partners to support reforms in the National Police Service.
(ix)    Review progress of implementation; approve progress reports and develop successive police reforms program documents and strategic frameworks. 
(x)     Perform any other function necessary to ensure effective co-ordination of the ongoing police reforms and realization of its objectives.
Reforms Key Result Areas (KRA)
(i)       Safe and secure Kenya.
(ii)     Safety of Kenyans lives and property.
(iii)    Delivery of quality policing services.
(iv)    Transformed, efficient, accountable and professional National Police Service.
(v)     Improved police welfare.
Expected Deliverables
(i)       Annual status of Police Reforms Report.
(ii)     Minutes and records of regular meetings.
(iii)    Monitoring and evaluation reports.
(iv)    Successive Police Reforms strategic frameworks.
(v)     Police reforms policy guidelines and direction.
(vi)    Any other deliverable as appropriate.
Reporting 
In performance of its functions, the committee shall report to the Cabinet Secretary Ministry of Interior and Co-ordination of National Government.
Meetings
The Committee shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the committee may consider necessary for the proper discharge of its function. It shall regulate its own standard operating procedures.
Secretariat
The Committee shall have a Police reforms co-ordination secretariat for effective performance of its function.
Term of office
The Committee shall remain in office for a period of two (2) years or for such a longer period as the Cabinet Secretary may by Gazette notice
Co-option
The committee may co-opt not more than three (3) members whose skills, experience, and expertise are necessary for performance of its functions.
Dated the 13th June, 2016.
JOSEPH NKAISSERY,
Cabinet Secretary,
Ministry of Interior and  Co-ordination of National Government.  

