
				Page: 2740GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8601
TASKFORCE ON THE REVIEW OF THE WAKF COMMISSIONERS ACT 1951
 
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Attorney-General has appointed a taskforce consisting of the following—
Hamadi Boga (Prof.)—Chairman
1. The Members of the Taskforce shall be—
Sheikh Juma Ngao
Zubeir Hussein Noor
Sheikh Ibrahim Lethome
Saad Yahya (Prof.)
Mwanakitina Bakari (Dr.)
Abdallah Kheir (Dr.)
The Chief Kadhi or his representative
Joint Secretaries: 
Brenda Mtoka
Jafred Maliru
TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE TASKFORCE
2. The Terms of Reference for the Taskforce shall be to—
(a)      review the legal, policy and institutional framework for the management of Wakf Commissioners of Kenya;
(b)     propose appropriate reforms to the legal, policy and institutional framework for Wakf properties in Kenya;
(c)      propose appropriate amendments to various legal instruments with a view to strengthening the legal and institutional framework for the management of wakfcommissioners of Kenya;
(d)     consider and propose appropriate mechanisms for collaboration and co-operation among the institutions involved in the management of wakf properties;
(e)      consider and propose appropriate mechanisms for the management of wakf Commissioners of Kenya in the devolved system of Government and in the management of the properties and the Wakf Commission of Kenya;
(f)      identify international or regional best practices in the management of Wakf Commissions and Wakf properties;
(g)      prepare a report on the necessary legal, policy and institutional reforms necessary for effective management of Wakf Commissioners of Kenya and Wakf properties;
(h)     carry out such other functions as may be necessary or incidental to the foregoing.
3. In the performance of its functions, the Taskforce—
(a)      shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the Taskforce shall consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions;
(b)     co-opt any resource persons as and when necessary, on short term basis, to assist in the achievement of the Terms of Reference;
(c)      make reports or updates, every two weeks, to the Attorney General outlining any matters that may require urgent action;
(d)     shall receive views from members of the public and receive oral and written submissions from any person with relevant information;
(e)      may use official reports of any previous investigations relevant to its mandate;
(f)      may carry out or cause to be carried out such studies or researches as may inform the Taskforce on its mandate.
4. The Taskforce shall complete its work and submit its final report to the Attorney-General not later than three months from the date of its first appointment and the Attorney-General may when necessary extend the period.
5. The costs incurred by the Taskforce, including but not restricted to the facilitation and payment of allowances in respect of the members and secretariat of the Taskforce, shall be defrayed from the funds of the Wakf Commissioners of Kenya.
6. The Secretariat of the Taskforce shall be based at the Office of the Attorney-General and Department of Justice offices in Mombasa. Submission from the public can be addressed to the Secretary, Taskforce to Review of the Wakf Commissioners Act, P.O. Box 80366 Mombasa.
Dated the 26th October, 2015.
GITHU MUIGAI,
Attorney General.

