
				Page: 2739
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8600
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TECHNICAL COMMITTEE (TC) FOR DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL INVESTMENT POLICY
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Principal Secretary, State Department of Commerce and Tourism in the Ministry of East African Affairs, Commerce and Tourism, in order to revamp the investment climate in Kenya, has established a Technical Committee for the development of a National Investment Policy which will guide investment promotion and facilitation in the country and support the attraction and retention of high levels of foreign and domestic investment in Kenya, spurring growth, innovation and job creation.
1. The Technical Committee shall comprise of the following persons:
Richard O. Sindiga             —(Chairman).
Dr. Moses Ikiara               — (Vice Chairman)
Members:
Isaac Bondet (Eng.)       Ministry of Energy and Petroleum
Robert Bwire                 Kenya Investment Authority           
Benjamin Chesang         Export Processing Zones Authority    
George N. Kamau          Ministry of Devolution and Planning
Mumbi Githaiga            Office of the Attorney-General and Department of Justice
Judy Oduma                  Council of Governors
Boniface Ngigi               The National Treasury
Rachael Osendo            Kenya Law Reform Commission
Said Athman                 Ministry of Mining
Joshua Kimulu              Ministry of East African Affairs, Commerce and Tourism
Onesmus Masinde        Kenya National Chamber of Commerce and Industry
Abraham Barno             Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries
Philemon Kiprono (Dr.)   Ministry of Interior and Co-ordination of National Government
Peter Ochieng                Export Promotion Council
Victor Ogalo                  Kenya Private Sector Alliance
Charles Mahinda           Ministry of Industrialization and Enterprise Development
Grephas Ogutu         Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade
Roslyn Ng’eno        (Joint Secretary)  Anthony Njeru        (Joint Secretary)
2. The Terms of Reference of the Committee shall be to:
(a)      address issues pertaining to the Kenya investment environment relevant to domestic and foreign investors covering best practice requirements in promotion, facilitation, investment prioritization among other areas in investment. The following are proposed areas of coverage:
(i)       overview and definition;
(ii)     investment incentives;
(iii)    institutional architecture and other imperatives for successful implementation;
(iv)    regional integration and international treaties;
(v)     role of ICT and other appropriate technologies;
(vi)    government objectives vis-a-vis investment, priority sectors;
(vii)  treatment and protection of investors (local/foreign), including:
local content and community issues;
minimum capital requirements;
standards of treatment;
protection;
guarantees;
environmental compliance;
corporate social responsibility;
(viii) sector specific policies and incentives; and
(ix)    other issues e.g.monetary issues.
(b)     undertake a review of the following areas to provide a comprehensive background:
(i)       brief overview of macroeconomic context for the last 10 years (market size and growth rate, macro stability (inflation, interest rates etc), infrastructure, technology and skill levels, investment flows (domestic and foreign; inward and outward; greenfield and M&A; country of origin or destination; sector-wise breakdown)
(ii)     overview of main policy trends for the last 10+ years (parameters/priorities of the national development strategy/poverty reduction strategy, trade policy including any regional trade arrangements, membership of the WTO, privatization/regulation, broad parameters of competition law, labour and environmental regulation, fiscal regime for foreign investors and their investments and intellectual property rights regime);
(iii)    Policy-making process for investment issue (what are the national policy objectives/targets for investment, to what extent are these purely economic objectives and how far are they affected by social and political objectives, which Ministry(ies)/agencies/other quasi-governmental bodies participate in the decision-making process, how much independence to sub-national layers of government (state, region, municipality etc.) have on investment issues).
(c)      the technical committee shall also undertake the following tasks:
(i)       review and document the national laws relevant to foreign investors;
(ii)     review and discuss such laws as employment laws, corporate laws, investment laws and evaluate whether and how they protect foreign investors.
(d)     undertake benchmarking tours to identify best practices in investment generation process;
(e)      review the NIP concept note, work programme and budget;
(f)      brief the steering committee;
(g)      undertake stakeholder consultations on the various sectors and areas of coverage.
3. In the performance of its functions, the Committee:
(a)      shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the Committee shall consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions;
(b)     liaise and consult with Government Ministries, public bodies and the private sector in order to collect the required information;
(c)      may carry out or cause to be carried out such studies or research as may inform the Committee on its mandate;
(d)     Subject to the foregoing, the committee shall have the powers necessary or expedient for the proper execution of its mandate, including the power to regulate its procedure.
4.  The Committee shall be deemed to have commenced work on the 1st September, 2015.
5. The Committee shall prepare and present its final policy to the Cabinet Secretary by the 31st December, 2015, after which it shall stand dissolved.
Dated the 26th October, 2015.
IBRAHIM MOHAMED,
Principal Secretary,
State Department of Commerce and Tourism,
Ministry of East African Affairs, Commerce and Tourism.

 

