
				Page: 1794GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4892
THE PRIVATIZATION ACT
(NO. 2 OF 2005)
PROPOSED TRANSFER OF THE KWA HOLDINGS E.A. LIMITED
 SHARES TO DISTELL LIMITED
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 36 of the Privatization Act, 2005, and following the—
(a) approval of the Privatization Programme by the Cabinet in 2008 and the publication of the Privatization Programme in Gazette Notice No. 8739 of 2009;
(b) approval of the privatization proposal for KWA Holdings E.A. Limited by the Cabinet and the National Assembly in November, 2011 and January, 2013, respectively, and the subsequent publication in the Standard Newspaper and the Daily Nation Newspaper on the 5th April, 2013 and on the 12th April 2013, respectively; and
(c)  completion of the approved negotiations between Distell Limited and the Privatization Commission,
the Privatization Commission gives notice that the following matters have been determined—
(a) that the Privatization Commission has completed negotiations for the sale of twenty six per centum  (26%) of the issued share capital in the KWA Holdings E.A. Limited shareholding held by Industrial and Commercial Development Corporation comprising twenty four million nine hundred and sixty thousand class A ordinary shares of five shillings each (hereinafter referred to as the “Sale Shares”); and
(b) that an agreement has been reached between KWA Holdings E.A. Limited, Industrial and Commercial Development Corporation and Distell Limited to transfer the Sale Shares to Distell Limited, Registration Number 1963/01333/06, of P.O. Box 184, whose registered office is Aan-de-Wagenweg 7599 Stellenbosch South Africa for a consideration of eight hundred and sixty million shillings on the following terms, among other terms contained in the negotiated documents—
(i)       an indefinite long term supply and distribution agreement between Distell Limited and the Kenya Wine Agencies Limited which is a subsidiary company of KWA Holdings E.A. Limited with a minimum lock in period of five years;
(ii)     an indefinite long term production and bottling agreement between Distell Limited and Kenya Wine Agencies Limited with a minimum lock in period of five years; and
(iii)    exclusivity for selected Distell Limited products being distributed by the Kenya Wine Agencies Limited and a mechanism and timing for transfer of other Distell Limited products to Kenya Wine Agencies Limited.
By Order of the Board.
Dated the 15th July, 2014.
SOLOMON KITUNGU,
Executive Director/CEO, Privatization Commission

