
				Page: 1029GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1834
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE JUDICIAL SERVICE ACT
(Cap. 185B)
IN THE MATTER OF A TRIBUNAL APPOINTED UNDER ARTICLE 168 (5) (b) OF THE CONSTITUTION TO INVESTIGATE THE CONDUCT OF JUSTICE PHILIP KIPTOO TUNOI, JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF KENYA
RULES OF PROCEDURE
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by Article 168(7) of the Constitution of Kenya and section 31 of the Judicial Service Act, the tribunal appointed to investigate the conduct of Justice Philip KiptooTunoi, Judge of the Supreme Court of Kenya by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Kenya vide GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1084 of 2016, makes the following Rules –
1.  In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires—
The meaning of “Chairperson”, “Member”, “Registry”, “Register”, and “Hearing”, shall be as defined in the Second Schedule to the Judicial Service Act.
“Judge” means the judge whose conduct is the subject of the investigation.
“Secretary” means the person or persons appointed by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Kenya and includes Joint Secretary, to carry out the functions set out in Rule 3 herein.
“Tribunal” means the tribunal appointed to investigate the conduct of Justice Philip KiptooTunoi, Judge of the Supreme Court of Kenya.
2.  The Chairperson shall co-ordinate the work of the Tribunal and shall, in addition,be responsible for—
(a) constituting such panel or panels of the Tribunal as may be necessary for the fair and expeditious disposal of the business of the Tribunal;
(b) assigning the business of the Tribunal to the members;
(c) supervising the activities of the Secretary and of the Registry; and
(d) exercising all other functions provided and/or implied by Article 168 of the Constitution or conferred by the Act and this Rules.
3.  (1) In relation to the proceedings before the Tribunal, the Secretary shall act in accordance with the instructions of the Chairperson and shall, in particular, be responsible for—
(a) the establishment and maintenance of the register and registry;
(b) the acceptance, transmission, service and custody of documents in accordance with this Schedule;
(c) the enforcement of decisions of the Tribunal;
(d) certifying that any order, direction or decision is an order, direction or decision of the Tribunal, the Chairperson or a member, as the case may be;
(e) causing records of the proceedings and minutes of the meetings of the Tribunal and such other records as the Tribunal may direct, to be kept; and
(f)  undertaking any duties assigned by the Tribunal for the benefit of the Tribunal.
(2)  With the authorization of the Chairperson, the Secretary may consider and dispose of procedural or administrative matters in accordance with this Schedule.
(3)  A party may, within seven days of any action taken by the Secretary in the performance of the functions set out in Rule (3), request in writing that the action be reviewed by the Tribunal.
(4)  Any administrative function of the Secretary may, in the Secretary’s absence, be performed by any member of staff of the Tribunal whom the Chairperson may authorize for that purpose.
(5)  The Secretary shall have, in addition to any powers specifically given by or under this Schedule, such powers as are generally provided under Order 49 of the Civil Procedure Rules, with such modifications as may be necessary.
4.  (1) The quorum necessary for the conduct of the hearing of the Tribunal shall be the Chairperson and two (2) other members.
(2)  Notwithstanding subparagraph (1), the business of the Tribunal may be carried on by any three (3) members and the Secretary.
5.  (1) The Tribunal shall interpret the provisions of this Schedule in a manner that promotes the principle of substantial justice.
(2)  Any irregularity resulting from failure to comply with any provision of this Schedule shall not in itself render the proceedings void or invalid where the irregularity does not occasion a miscarriage of justice.
(3)  Where any such irregularity comes to the attention of the Tribunal, the Tribunal may, and shall if it considers any person may have been prejudiced by the irregularity, give such directions as it deems just, to cure or waive the irregularity before reaching its decision.
(4)  Clerical mistakes in any document recording a direction, order or decision of the Tribunal, or errors arising in such a document from an accidental slip or omission, may be corrected by the Chairperson, by certificate under their hand.
6. Nothing in this Schedule shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any of the powers of the Tribunal necessary for the proper execution of its mandate as set out in the Constitution and this Act.
7. (1) The Counsel assisting the Tribunal shall draw up a list of the allegations against the Judge, together with a summary of the evidence in support of the allegations and shall serve the document containing the allegations and the summary of the evidence on the Judge before the date of hearing.
(2) The Tribunal shall serve the Judge a hearing notice at least fourteen (14) days before the date of hearing.
(3) Service upon the Judge shall be effected through personal service or through his appointed legal counsel or through the Chief Registrar of the Judiciary.
8. (1) The hearings shall be held in private save that the Judge whose conduct is the subject of the investigation may choose to have the hearing in public.
(2) The Tribunal may exclude any person or class of persons from all or any part of the hearing if satisfied that it is desirable so to do for—
(a) the preservation of order; or
(b) the due conduct of the investigation; or
(d) the protection of any witness in the investigation or any person referred to in the course of the investigation or the property or reputation of such witness or person; and
(d) may, if satisfied that it is desirable for any of the purposes aforesaid so to do, order that no person shall publish the name, address or photograph of any such witness or person or any evidence or information whereby he would or may be identified from.
9.  The Judge shall have the right to be present during all of the proceedings that relate to him and shall be entitled to legal representation by counsel.
10.   The Counsel assisting the Tribunal will present evidence relating to the conduct of the Judge and any matter relevant to the investigation.
11. (1) Evidence before the Tribunal may be presented in the form of memoranda, affidavit or other documentation and the Tribunal shall be entitled to receive such documents and to use the contents thereof in forming its opinion.
(2) The Judge shall be furnished with copies of any documentary evidence and may seek leave to address the Tribunal thereon.
12. The Tribunal may, at its sole discretion, summon any person or persons to testify before it on oath or to produce such documents as the Tribunal may require, and the person so summoned shall be obliged to attend and to testify or produce the required documents and the provisions applying to witnesses summoned by ordinary courts of law shall apply to such person.
13. The Judge shall have the right to cross-examine all witnesses during the hearing.
14.  (1) The Judge shall be entitled to testify and/or call evidence to rebut allegations made against him.
(2) The Tribunal and Counsel assisting the Tribunal shall be entitled to cross-examine the Judge or any witness called by the Judge.
(3) If the Judge elects not to testify and/or call evidence in rebuttal, the Tribunal shall be entitled to consider the evidence presented and make a report and appropriate recommendations.
15. The Tribunal shall have the power to recall any witness.
16. The Tribunal shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence but shall be guided by the rules of natural justice and relevance.
17. At the close of the hearing of all evidence before the Tribunal, Counsel assisting the Tribunal and the Judgeor their counsel shall be entitled to make submissions.
 18. (1) The decisions and recommendation of the Tribunal shall be by simple majority.
(2) Where a member, for reasons either beyond his/her control and/or the control of the Tribunal, is unable to sign the decision of the Tribunal, the reason shall be recorded, and the decisions signed by the other members.
(3) All decisions of the Tribunal shall be in writing and shall contain a concise statement of the investigation, the points for determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for such decision upon each separate issue.
(4) The decision of the Tribunal shall be delivered in public on a date fixed for that purpose but not later than fourteen days after conclusion of the proceedings.
(5) The Secretary shall on delivery of the decision under subparagraph (2) cause the decision of the Tribunal to be published in the Gazette and posted on the Tribunal’s website.
19. The Tribunal shall sit on such days and at such times and venues as it may determine.
20. The Registry shall be open for business from Monday to Friday from 8.30 am to 4:30pm but may be open at other times for urgent business at the direction of the Chairperson.
21. Summonses issued by the Tribunal shall be endorsed by and bear the signature of the Secretary.
22. The Chairperson shall cause to be taken notes of all proceedings before the Tribunal or may direct that the record of any proceedings before the Tribunal be taken by shorthand notes or tape-recorded or, at the discretion of the Tribunal, electronically recorded.
23. The Chairperson may issue Practice Directions for the just, efficient and economical determination of proceedings under these Rules, and the Practice Directions so issued shall be special rules of practice and procedure of the Tribunal and shall have the same status as the provisions of the Second Schedule to the Judicial Service Act.
24. The Tribunal may, for sufficient cause shown, extend the time prescribed by these Rules for doing any act or taking any proceedings upon such terms and conditions, if any, as may appear just and expedient.
25. The Tribunal may, from time to time, by notice in the Kenya Gazette, amend these Rules.
26. (1) Subject to the provisions of the Second Schedule to the Judicial Service Act, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Chairperson may issue practice directions in relation to the procedures provided for by these Rules.
(3) Nothing in these Rules shall limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of the Tribunal conferred by Article 168 of the Constitution either on its own motion or on the application of a party to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Tribunal.
Dated the 14th March, 2016.
SHARAD RAO,
Chairperson of the Tribunal.

