
				Page: 1035GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1847
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR PHASE I OF VIPINGO MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ON  PARCEL  NUMBERS: MN/IV/292/02,  MN/III/291/01,  MN/IV/119/02,  MN/IV/117/01,  MN/IV/117/02, MN/IV/117/03,  MN/IV/116,  MN/III/3545/01,  MN/III/4393,  MN/IV/8724/03, MN/III/8724/04, MN/IV/664, MN/III/295 IN KILIFI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Vipingo Development Limited, proposes to undertake Phase 1 development that will see the construction of high quality reliable, cost effective and sustainable state of the art infrastructure. The proposed infrastructure is anchored on providing the most cost effective facilities and  utilities  in  the  area  to  ensure  smooth  running of  activities  in  an  urban environment with access to good roads, clean safe water, reliable electricity and high quality telecommunication services among others.
The total project area for Phase I measures about 900 acres of land. The design for the proposed Infrastructure development for Phase I of Vipingo  mixed use development provides for the construction of various infrastructure aspects; road works,  foot paths, culverts and drainage, road furniture, electrical installations, duct works (electrical) and Water reticulation.
The project is located along the Kenyan coastline, 30 kilometers (km) from the Port of Mombasa  and  Moi  International  Airport  Mombasa,  connected  to  the  Mombasa–Malindi  Highway  and  40  km  to  the  proposed  Government  Mariakani  Logistics  Hub. The  site  is  strategically  located  between  growing  Mtwapa  and  Kilifi  towns interconnected to the port of Mombasa, Mombasa Airport and LAPSSET Project.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Proposed Mitigation Measure


Noise and vibration


Implement both engineering and administrative controls for machines and equipment to reduce noise pollution at the site.
Fitting noise machines with noise reduction devices.
Educating all workers on importance of making correct use of PPE.
Comply to Noise and Excessive Vibrations Regulations, 2009.


Dust generation


Sprinkling of water at the site and access roads during dry conditions to suppress fugitive dust.
Fix a dust proof net high above the hoarding.
Strict enforcement on PPE use by all workers.



Solid waste generation


Contract a NEMA licensed waste handler to manage solid waste.
Apply an Integrated Solid Waste Management approach.
Adhere to the provisions of the Waste Management Regulations of 2006.


Air pollution: fumes


Use of low sulphur diesel for diesel powered vehicles and equipment.
Proper maintenance of machinery and vehicles.
Prohibit open burning of any kind of waste on site.


Marine environment degradation


Recommended vegetation will be planted to protect the mangroves and the shore line.
Reducing and eliminating (where practical) the major environmental pressures that degrade, or threaten to degrade the marine environment.
Mechanisms to conserve on water use, careful disposal of chemicals that come in contact with water supplies, and encouraging improved waste management techniques.


Risk of occupational accidents and diseases


Set up a health and safety committee and periodic site inspections, training and annual safety audits.
Provide appropriate PPEs to workers and visitors to the site.
Adhere to the provisions of the Occupational Health and Safety Act of 2007.


Generation of waste water


Adoption of water conservation opportunities.
Identify opportunities for reuse of waste water.
Treatment to meet national standards for waste water discharge.
Formulate and implement an inspection and maintenance program for the waste water disposal system.


Storm Water


Storm water should be separated from processes and waste water streams in order to reduce the volume of waste water to be treated.
Run-off from areas with potential sources of contamination should be minimised and the peak discharge ratio.


Increased demand for water and electricity


Incorporate rain water harvesting technology in the project design.
Encourage water reuse and/or  recycling.
Use of energy efficient machines and appliances.


Land degradation


Limit excavations to areas marked for development.
Apply a layer of selected backfill material on the access roads.


Vegetation clearance


Ensure vegetation is cleared in areas where foundations are to be dug.
Trees to be protected insitu to be clearly identified on the plans and communicated to all construction staff.


Insecurity


Employ construction workers who possess  valid certificates of good conduct.
Formulate a comprehensive security plan and implement it. Contract a reputable security firm to be in charge of security at the site.
Liaise with the neighbours and the local administration in security management.


Traffic congestion


Transport of materials during the traffic off  peak  hours  to  avoid  possible  traffic congestion.
Purchasing  of  material  according  to  the demand.
Ensuring  minimal  residence  period  for trucks mobilizing material on site,
Proper  planning  during  construction period.


Emergency  preparedness
and  evacuation procedures


Design  suitable  documented  emergency preparedness  and  evacuation procedures  to  be  used  during  any emergency.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
MR/8808085                                                     Director-General,

