
				Page: 2204GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6952
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
AUTHORITY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL
 DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT L.R. NO. MN/I/1571,
NYALI AREA IN MOMBASA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Fatma Ali Haji and Amina Kassim Osman, is proposing a Residential Development within Nyali Area in Mombasa County. The Project involves the construction, subsequent operation and possible decommissioning of six typically identical residential apartment blocks consisting of a ground, 1st to 3rd floors. Every floor of every block will constitute two household units, each featuring the following; 3 Bedrooms with one being the master bedroom, living room, dining, titchen, store, dhobi, stairwell, sanitary facilities. Other communal features will include: - Underground water storage tanks, 57 parking slots, Boundary wall, Gate house, landscaped areas and swimming pool. The built up area of the proposed project shall cover 8328m2 and contain 48 residential units.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impact


Mitigation Measures


Noise


Sheltering of the site.
Restricting demolition to day time only.
Using well-conditioned demolition machines.
Providing those working at the site with PPE such as ear muffs and earplugs to reduce the levels of noise reaching the inner ear.


Solid waste generation


Recover the reusable and recyclable components of the waste either for use in the new construction or for sale to other constructors/ recyclers.
Contract the services of a NEMA licensed demolition waste handler to deal with the non-usable, non-recyclable waste.


Workforce effluent


Procure portable toilet facilities to be emptied regularly.


Air pollution


Demolition will be conducted within the shortest time possible.
Restricting demolition to daytime at times when the wind intensity is low.
The site will be sheltered from the other parts of the premise.
The rubble will be sprinkled with water.
Workers on site will be provided with the necessary PPE such as dust masks.
The contractor will deploy dust control screens.


Occupational health and safety of workers and neighbors


Provision of PPE to the workers.
 Clear signposting and warning signs on site.
Accidents will be investigated and appropriate measure to prevent recurrence.
Demarcate and sign post routes and parking for traffic into the site.
Only allow the number of vehicles that can be accommodated at the designated parking at a time.


Unused soak pit and septictank


The sewage in the septic tanks and soak pit will be pumped out by contracted NEMA accredited sewage handlers and transported offsite for disposal.
The septic tanks will be desludged and the sludge likewise taken off site for disposal.
The septic tanks should first be emptied of all residues and cleaned preferably with lime which acts as a disinfectant.
Once soak pits are emptied, lime can also be used as a disinfectant.
The holes should then be filled up with either sand or gravel to ground level. The disturbed areas once backfilled should be properly graded and seeded/ planted ( if necessary) with appropriate vegetation ( trees and grass).
For the purposes of the planned new developments the proponent should keep a record of the location of the decommissioned septic tanks and soak pits.



Change of user conflicts


Change of user to be approved by the County Government of Mombasa and the Ministry of Lands.
Proponent to commit to implementation of the Environmental Management Plan at operational phase to mitigate change of user impacts.
 The proponent and neighbors to constitute a liaison team to ensure compliance with EMP.


Sourcing of raw materials


The contractor will obtain raw materials for the construction from sources that are compliant with NEMA Regulations.
The contractor will procure quantities that are sufficient for the intended works only and recycle as far as practical to curtail wastage.
The contractor will commit to extensive use of recycled raw materials as will be appropriate and in a manner that does not compromise the safety of the development.


Destruction of the physical environment


Obtain a permit from Kenya Forest Service and County Government of Mombasa prior to cutting any trees on site.
Compacted areas to be ripped to prevent erosion.
Restore degraded areas through landscaping using trees and sediment binding grasses.


Occupational health and safety of workers


The contractor will provide workers with appropriate Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) and ensure their use.
Workers to be trained on equipment use.
 First aid facilities to be available on site.
 Contractor to comply with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) by registering the site as a work place.
All visitors to the site to be provided with PPEs.


Workforce sanitation


Procure portable toilets for use by the workforce from a NEMA licensed waste management company.


Solid wastes generation
 


 All recyclable materials should be collected and sent to a licensed company for recycling.
Provide litter bins that encourage the separation of wastes into paper, glass, plastics etc for recycling.
Contract a NEMA licensed solid waste handler to manage wastes from the development.
Comply with Legal Notice No. 121 of 2006 in management of solid wastes generated by the development.


Increased demand for water for construction use


The contractor will ensure prudential use of water resources during construction by avoiding wastage such as running pipes and taps.
The proponent should meter and monitor the water yields from the borehole on a monthly basis.


Air pollution


Contractor to deploy fine dust screens at the project site during construction.
 Sprinkle dust producing materials such as ballast with water during offloading on site.
The contractor has retained sediment binding grass within the site to mitigate against dust generation by vehicles delivering raw materials on site.
Use serviceable machinery and vehicles for supply of raw materials.


Noise


Delivery of raw materials to site to be done only during the day.
No delivery of raw materials should be undertaken during weekends.
 Workers on site should be provided with earmuffs to attenuate high noise levels associated with concrete mixing machines, hoists and lift installations during casting works.
Use of serviceable vehicles and machinery is also expected to reduce noise levels.


Insecurity


 Proponent and contractor to vet all workers on site.
 Require certificates of good conduct from potential employees and copies of identification documents for all workers to be retained by the contractor.


Wastewater generation


Installation of a wastewater treatment plant (bio-digester).
Monitoring the performance of the treatment plant on a monthly basis at a NEMA designated laboratory to ensure treated water conforms to Schedule III of Legal Notice No. 120 of 2006.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project. A copy of Environmental Assessment report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke and comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/8045843 National Environment Management Authority.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6953
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
AUTHORITY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED 60MW WIND POWER PROJECT LOCATED IN KITHIMA, MUGAE AND KIRWIRO SUB LOCATIONS OF RWARERA LOCATION IN BUURI CONSTITUENCY IN MERU COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Maralal Energy Limited, intends to develop a 60MW Wind Power Project of electricity and supply to the National grid Rwarera Location in Meru County. The Project is located about 2KM off the Nanyuki–Isiolo Road in Buuri Constituency of Meru County in Kithima, Kirirwo and Mugae sub-locations of Rwarera Location. The project proponent will intend to use Model Suzlon 297 of the turbine Specifications.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Aspect


Mitigating Measures 


Dust


Excavate during off-peak hours of the wind movement.
Safety procedures.
Use of PPE.


Emissions (particulates, carbon dioxide and monoxide) from equipment such as bulldozers, graders


Use of respirator by workers.
Recondition engine exhaust systems.
Establish equipment inspection program.


Noise
 


Use of ear protectors.
Establish equipment inspection programme.


Electromagnetic Interference
 


Install coated turbines (nacelle insulation).
 


Aircraft safety  impacts


KCCA high restriction will be adhered to.


Spills of oil and other hazardous chemicals from construction equipment


Spill prevention procedures & response plan.
Concrete floor waterproofed.
Spill control kit.
Training.
Water site regularly.


Sewage disposal /overflow waste water disposal


Sewage and waste water to be discharged to septic tank.
Monitor level of septic tank and exhaust as necessary.


Solid waste disposal


Provide suitable solid waste containers.
Segregate and recycle solid waste use of a waste pit.


Oil, chemical and material spills


Spill control procedures.
Training.
Spill control kit.


Removal of soil and vegetation


Landscaping (grass, plants and flowers
Allow grazing in the wind farm.


Water usage


Apply to local authority for permit for abstraction.
Apply for temporary connection during construction.


Electricity usage


Apply to KPLC for connection.
Implement appropriate energy conservation measures.


Mortality of the bird species


Install bird scare on the tower to scare off the birds from perching.
Place visible markers including light at night to help birds avoid coming close to the turbines.


Grazing of animals


Allow access into the site for grazing.


Visual change


Landscaping (grass, plants and flowers
Creation of a buffer zone.
Installation of window awnings, or curtailing wind turbine operations when certain lighting conditions exist (Lantz, Wiser, and Hand, 2012)
Installation of coated turbines with low reflectivity.


Transportation  of
turbines  and
construction
materials to the site


  All vehicles delivering bulk material to the site not  to  exceed recommended  weight limit  and  comply  with traffic rules.
Use  of  signage  to control flow of traffic.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Meru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project. A copy of Environmental Assessment report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke and comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/8045782 National Environment Management Authority.

