
				Page: 3338Gazette Notice No. 9023
THE STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS ACT
(No. 23 of 2013)
Notification of the Proposed Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Paraprofessionals (Veterinary Medicines Directorate) Regulations, 2014, Regulatory Impact Statement
PURSUANT to section 8 of the Statutory Instruments Act, 2013, the Cabinet Secretary for Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries notifies the general public of the preparation of the Regulatory Impact Statement for the proposed Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Paraprofessionals (Veterinary Medicines Directorate) Regulations, 2014.
The objective of the proposed Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Paraprofessionals (Veterinary Medicines Directorate) Regulations, 2014 is to provide the legal framework that assures proper professional control in the distribution and use of veterinary medicines and to reduce their misuse and abuse in the community. The proposed regulations provide for the regulation of the manufacture, importation, exportation, registration, distribution, prescription and dispensing of veterinary medicines and poisons as provided in section 39(2)(a) of the Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Paraprofessionals Act, 2011.
Copies of the Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Paraprofessionals (Veterinary Medicines Directorate) Regulations, 2014 and the Regulatory Impact Statement may be obtained and inspected from the Kenya Veterinary Board offices in Kabete, Nairobi, or from the website www.kenyavetboard.org, free of charge.
Any person may comment on the proposed Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Paraprofessionals (Veterinary Medicines Directorate) Regulations, 2014 and on the Regulatory Impact Statement, in writing. The written submissions may sent to the Kenya Veterinary Board through email address info@kenyavetboard.org or posted to P.O. Box 513-00605, Nairobi or hand-delivered to the Kenya Veterinary Board offices in Kabete, Nairobi, within fourteen (14) days from the date of publication of this notice.
Dated the 4th December, 2014.
FELIX K. KOSKEI,
Cabinet Secretary for Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries.

