
				Page: 738GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1062
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED SALT FARM DEVELOPMENT, ON PLOT L.R. NO. 28509 / CR 59576, GONGONI IN KILIFI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Kilifi Salt Limited, is proposing a salt farm development, on plot L.R. No. 28509/CR 59576, Gongoni in Kilifi County. The project entails construction of; Office block, area for reservoirs; 470 acres, area for condenser; 381 acres, area for crystallizer and refinery; 105 acres, 5 staff quarters each containing 3 bedrooms, a lounge area with the dining and kitchen and parking for heavy commercial vehicles.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Potential impacts 


Mitigation measures 


CONSTRUCTION PHASE


Loss of vegetative cover and site biodiversity


Undertake top survey to establish their exact locations on site.
Undertake selective clearing.
Retain mature trees on site.
Plant more trees.
Landscape and beautify the site on completion of construction works.
Delineate an area for indigenous tree gardening.


Destruction of the soil and ground slope
 


Level and compact the ground to enhance stability.
Create ample landscaping to address varying levels.
Plant grass.
Create walk ways.
Improve vegetative cover and replace losses through replanting.


 
Increased surface run-off


Landscaping.
Improve tree cover.
Create storm water drains.
Harvest rain water on site.
Stabilize and level the ground to break.


 
Accumulation of wastes


Remove building material wastes.
Provide building material in prepared forms.
Dispose of all the wastes generated.
Recycled materials.
Sub-contract an agent to clear site debris.


 
Pollution of the environment


Provide a waste treatment system.
Ensure no improper discharge of waste water.
Control erosion on site.


 
Increased traffic volume


Create a walk way to the plot entrance.
Provide sign posts to guide motorists.
Provide ample parking on the plot.
Liaise with the roads department to improve safety measures.


 
Increased liquid and solid wastes


Provide waste bins in strategic locations.
Engage an agent in collecting refuse.
Construct a refuse chamber for kitchen collection.
Provide clear warning signs of management of wastes.
Employ ground keepers.


Strain on water supply systems


Construct an underground or elevated storage tank with sufficient capacity.
Sink a bore hole.
Maintain the supply system.
Liaise with CWB to upgrade the waterline.


Increased health and safety risks


Workers on site shall:
Use protective gear when undertaking works (helmets, gloves etc).
Accident kitty shall be provided.
The working schedule shall conform to labour laws.
Allocation of duty shall be based on professional training.
Use of machines to transfer and shift materials shall be employed to minimize strain.
Undertake target group measures to ensure effective management.
All employees on the site shall be trained on health, hygiene and safety.
First aid kits shall be availed in strategic locations.
A health scheme shall be provided to all employees.
Stickers and labels shall be put in the necessary area.
Clear warnings of hazards shall be indicated.
Fire equipments shall be installed in all buildings.
Firefighting equipments shall be erected.


Strain on energy sources


Purchase and install a generator.
Use energy saving systems (bulbs).
Purchase of step up systems to cushion against variation.
Tap solar energy for alternative use.
Use of wind power for the borehole.


Site aesthetics


Landscaping of the site.
Constant clearing and maintenance by staff.
Water the ground.
Plant suitable grass.


OPERATION PHASE


Increased solid waste generation


Providing adequate number of sanitary facilities for the workers, residents and visitors.
Provision of bins, one for bio-degradable and another for non-biodegradable matter.
Providing adequate number of suitable solid waste containers.
Contracting a licensed waste transporter to collect solid waste for dumping at an approved site.
Create awareness on the solid waste integrated management programme.
Undertake checkup on the drainage.
Undertake regular maintenance to minimize leakage and blockage.


Increased liquid waste generation


Routine checkups and monitoring of the sewer system to ensure the sewerage and effluents always drain effectively through properly designed and laid pipes.
Sanitary facilities shall be kept clean throughout.
Any breakage to the waste pipes shall be fixed promptly.
Monitor effluent water quality regularly to ensure that the stipulated discharge rules and standards are not violated.


Visual impacts
 


The proponents shall engage the services of a landscape architect on preferred finishes that enhances visual outlook, uniqueness and visual appreciation.
The building finishing shall incorporate a screening effect that blocks direct views of the neighbouring plots from the upper windows of dwelling units on the upper floors.
Harmonize details, material and finishes for the roofs and walls with existing developments in the neighbourhood.
Other site improvements shall be undertaken to enhance aesthetics.


Increased pressure on trunk infrastructure


The building should have water harvesting systems (gutters, downpipes and water storage facilities to enhance collection and storage of rain water).
Sensitize the residents on efficient water use.
Paving of and site frontage and any other open area should be done using pervious materials like concrete blocks as this will encourage water percolation.
Ensure electrical equipment, appliances and lights are switched off when not being used and install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.
The pro-active design of the building has incorporated storm drains to channel storm water to existing natural drainage systems. The storm drains shall be kept open and regularly maintained. It will utilize an appropriate design to enhance flow.


Increased flow of traffic along the Ngala Road and traffic conflict


Provide road signs to guide traffic flow.
Use traffic reflectors.
Create bumps to reduce speed along Ngala Road.


Noise pollution


Build a perimeter wall to cushion against noise intensity.
Eliminate use of noise gadgets.
Use silencers on generators.


Increased surface run off


Improve and level the area near the gate to minimize accumulation of storm water
Construct a storm drain to join the existing Municipal Council storm water drain.
Enhance grass cover to minimize storm water intensity.


Fire outbreak


Provide extinguishers.
Check, monitor and replace fire extinguishers to ensure they can cater for emergency needs.


DECOMMISSIONING PHASE


Accumulation of rubbles


Engage a qualified contractor to undertake demolition works.
Employ the best technology in the demolition and destruction of structures
Sample out useful materials.
Dispose of waste.
Engage a landscape architect to restore the site qualities in preparation for new projects.
Undertake assessment of the ground through a competent geologist.


Noise pollution and vibration


Switch of the engines of the lorries while on site.
Undertake demolitions during the day.
Engage qualified persons.
Avoid use of ballistic materials.


Loss of employment


Provide advance notice to workers.
Notify welfare schemes to pay workers.
Organize pension payments with registered firms.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8767433         National Environment Management Authority.

