
				Page: 737GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1061
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED APARTMENTS DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT L.R. NO. 12596/1 ON LIKONI ROAD, INDUSTRIAL AREA, NAIROBI CITY COUNTY
INITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Express Kenya Limited, has proposed to develop (224)  high-rise  apartments  in 4 blocks  on Plot L.R. No. 12596/1 located on Likoni Road in Industrial Area, Nairobi City County. Three of the blocks consist of 8 No.  apartments per floor for a total of eight floors each while the fourth block consists of 4 No. apartments on each floor for a total of eight floors. For the first three blocks (Block A, B and B1), there are 4 No. 3 Bed/rooms apartments with a master en suite and a DSQ, 2 No. 3 bed/rooms  apartments  with a master ensuite and 2 No. 2 bed/rooms apartments  with a master en suite. They are all sited conveniently to leave ample space  for  green  landscaping  and  to  enable  traffic  flow  into  and  out  of  the  residential compound with ease.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Project Activities


Negative Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Procurement, transportation Construction of site office


Oil spillage, materials spillage
Littering the site, soil compaction
Heavy vehicle traffic
Ensure NO spillage occurs.
Ensure use of serviceable vehicles.
Ensure no littering of park.
Ensure safe storage of materials.

 

 


Demolition of existing building structure


Oil spillage, materials spillage
Littering the site
Ensure NO oil spillage occurs.
Ensure use of manual labour and hand tools, ensure use of serviceable machinery.

 

 


Excavation and construction of the foundation


Oil spillage, noise, dust, soil destruction
Ensure NO oil spillage occurs.
Ensure use of manual labour and hand tools, ensure use of serviceable machinery, ensure removal of all materials brought in during construction.

 

 


Construction of infrastructure  utilities


Oil spillage, noise, dust, soil destruction
Ensure NO oil spillage occurs, ensure use of manual labour and hand tools, ensure use of serviceable machinery.

 

 


Construction of facility for solid waste handling and temporary storage


Poor sanitation and environmental health degradation as a result of inadequate effluent waste water disposal and solid waste management
Ensure NO oil spillage occurs.
Ensure use of manual labour and hand tools, Ensure use of serviceable machinery.

 

 


Generation of sewerage waste water


If not properly managed, could compromise sanitary hygiene of the building
Ensure the sewage waste water is collected and disposed off into the waste , water treatment works established on site. Ensure that the onsite waste water treatment works is regularly maintained and audited annually to ensure compliance.

 

 


Storm water discharge into the storm drains


If not well directed to the City County’s storm drain, could lead to flooding and property destruction
Ensure the storm drain channels are regularly cleaned to remove debris.

 

 


Significant energy and water consumption


Could cause strain on the national grid and the town council water supply system
Develop and maintain plans for energy and water conservation such as fitting of energy save bulbs, and solar water heating and insulated hot  water storage tanks.

 

 


Increased traffic


Might result in incessant traffic jams
Provide signage on the main road to provide clear direction to drivers Provide adequate parking spaces for the all the town houses.

 

 

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi  City County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8767346                                                                                                                         National Environment Management Authority.

