
				Page: 714GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 948
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT ACT
(No.  17 of 2012)
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF UASIN GISHU
UASIN GISHU COUNTY PUBLIC SERVISE BOARD
REPORT TO THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY FOR THE YEAR 2015
1.0   Introduction
PURSUANT to section 59 sub-section 1 (f) of the County Government Act, 2012, the functions and powers of the County Public Service Board inter alia, is to evaluate and report to the County Assembly each December on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Article 10 and 232 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, are complied with in the county public service. Further section 59 sub-section 5 of the County Government Act, 2012, states that the report prepared shall include:
(a) All the steps taken and decisions made by the Board in the realization of values and principles;
(b) Specific recommendations that require to be implemented in the promotion and protection of the values and principles;
(c)  Specific decisions on particulars of persons or public body who have violated the values and principles, including actions taken or recommendations against them;
(d) Any impediment in the promotion of the values and principles and
(e)  The programmes the Board is undertaking or has planned to undertake in the medium term towards the promotion of the values and principles.
The scope of this report is therefore limited to evaluation and reporting to the County Assembly the extent to which the values and principles as enshrined in Article 10 and 232 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, are embedded in critical Board decisions and policies with a view of translating these values into practice. This is aimed at ensuring that citizens not only access quality services, but do also
recognize in public officers serving them a spirit of fairness, integrity and respect for their rights and human dignity.
2.0   Measures/Steps Taken in the Realization of National Values and Principles of Public Service.
This section outlines the steps taken by the County Public Service Board (CPSB) to realize the national values and principles of public service in the year 2015:
(a) The CPSB continuously supported the Training, Disciplinary and Human Resource Management Advisory Committees in delivery of the mandate under delegated authority. The same support was also extended to Chief Officers in their operational management of Human Resource aspects in their respective departments with an expanded mandate allowing them to recruit temporary staff once their request is approved by the Board.
(b) In an endeavor to uphold transparency and accountability, job advertisements were carried in daily newspapers with nationwide circulation and applications were done online; applicants were able to track the status of their applications.
(c)  On Accountability for administrative acts, the CPSB issued advisories to the executive on the following issues: Pension and Gratuity management, payment of approved airtime entitlement, engagement of temporary staff and annual leave management. The executive was also encouraged to adhere to circulars from constitutional commissions.
(d) Members of the Board, in the course of their duties, encountered instances where conflict of interest would have arisen and such interests were declared to avoid conflict in discharge of their duties.
(e)  During the year under review, the Board undertook departmental sensitization sessions with all staff on National Values and Principles of Governance and Values and Principles of Public Service. It was noted that most of the staff are ignorant of the constitutional provision on Article 10 and 232 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. Newly recruited employees were inducted and sensitization on Values and Principles of Public Service was a major aspect during the induction.
(f)   Continuous Professional Development was undertaken by all Board Members through participation in Workshops/Seminars in various professional bodies e.g. Institute of Human Resource Management, Institute of Certified Public Secretaries of Kenya, Institute of Public Accountants of Kenya and Kenya Institute of Management and Advantage Training. Applications by County Officers for professional courses were approved in line with Public service provisions for study leave.
(g) The Board is developing a Staff Code of Conduct and Ethics in line with the provisions of the Public Officers Ethics Act, 2003, with an aim of instilling professional ethics in service delivery.
(h) The recruitment process as undertaken by the Board affords equal opportunity to all and encourages Women, Youth, Persons with Disabilities and the marginalized to apply; affirmative action was applied to ensure inclusion. A total of four hundred and thirty (430) employees were recruited during the period under review: One Hundred and Seventy Seven (177) Male - 41% and Two Hundred and Fifty Three (253) Females - 59%. This was based on skill gaps in various departments.  However, the Board received a complaint on the status of inclusion of the Ogiek Community in recruitment, political representation and allocation of bursaries. The complainant was invited for a discussion on the issues raised but failed to turn up. A response to this effect was given to the Office of the Ombudsman.
3.0   Specific decisions on particulars of persons or public body who have violated the values and principles, including action taken or recommended against them;

Name


Violation


Value/Principle Violated


Action Taken/ Recommendation


Plant Operator


Misuse of Government Resources


Integrity and Accountability


Dismissed from Service


Revenue Officer


Fraud


Integrity and Accountability


Dismissed from service


Nurse


Failure to obey lawful instruction


Rule of Law


Recommendation to PSC for dismissal from service


Nurse


Negligence


Professionalism


Recommendation to PSC for dismissal from service


Nurse


Absconding duty


Accountability


Dismissed from service

4.0   Impediment in the promotion of the values and principles:
In the course of promoting the values and principles referred to in the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, Article 10 and 232, the CPSB encountered the following challenges:
(a) There was lack of appreciation of the process by the Controlling Officers coupled with a lukewarm reception by the staff.
(b) It was observed that the staff are ignorant of the provisions of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 in respect of National values and principles of Governance and Values and principles of public service: they do not associate the provisions to their day to day activities in service provision to the public.
(c)  There was perceived fear by staff that the process was targeting them which initially created a tense atmosphere and resistance during the sensitization sessions.
(d) The County Anti-Corruption Committee took a backseat during the sensitization process which could have been a boost to the fight against corruption.
(e)  Lack of cooperation from controlling officer who are expected to report cases of violation of values and principles by staff under them.

(a) Intense lobbying by the public in relation to recruitment. This creates a culture of extortion by fraudsters who take advantage of the situation.
(b) The Marginalized and Persons with Disabilities shy off from applying for advertised positions hence difficulty in attaining inclusion in the county public service.
(c)  Insufficient budgetary allocation for programs on protection and promotion of values and principles.
5.0   Specific recommendations and programmes  the  board  is  undertaking or has planned to undertake in the medium term towards  the protection and  promotion  of  the  values  and principles:
(a) Re-Sensitization of Chief Officers and Administrators on National Values and Principles of Governance and Values and Principles of Public Service.
(b) Providing regular advisories to the County Executive Committee on aspects of human resource management and development that enhance the practice of good governance.
(c)  Identification and training of champions on values of principles.
(d) Provide alternative communication channels for purposes of receiving feedback from staff and the public on violation of values and principles.
(e)  Enhance collaboration with the County Anti-Corruption Committee in promotion of values and principles.
(f)   Rolling out sensitization on values and principles to the public at sub-county level.
(g) Carry out a baseline survey on values and principles.
(h) Collaborate with the National Council of Persons with Disabilities to sensitize their members on the mandate of the Board and demystify the recruitment process and requirements for inclusion in the public service.
Dated the 23rd December, 2015.
BEN K. SAMOEI,
MR/8767448                                  Secretary, Uasin Gishu CPSB.
 



