
				Page: 1487GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4457
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF OLE RIBIRIE FUEL STATION ON L.R. NO. 209/11610 ALONG MBAGATHI ROAD, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Ole Ribirie Company Limited) is proposing to a fuel filling station on L.R No. 209/11610 along Mbagathi Road, Nairobi County.
The proposed fuel station project involves installation of three underground fuel storage tanks, three fuel pump dispensers, a car washing bay, a convenient store, a tyre bay, a vehicle servicing area, a cafeteria, offices and stores.
Below is a summary of the anticipated impacts and the proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Soil disturbance leading to potential soil erosion 


Put in place soil protection measures such as vegetation planting, landscaping and installation of gabions.
Backfilling of dug out areas. 


Removal of vegetation


Clear vegetation only where necessary.
Plant trees and carry out landscaping. 


Soil and ground water contamination


Leakage tests prior to project commissioning.
Ensuring tanks are emptied before removal.
Inspection and maintenance programme for the tanks (routine leak tests).
Careful removal of underground tanks.
Remediation of any contaminated soil.


Ground water pollution


Construct channels (drains) for drainage of effluent.
Construct an oil interceptor (oil-water separator) and channel effluent into it.
Construct a bund (low wall) at the offloading area for containment of any accidental spillage.
Ensure that wastewater  from the oil interceptor is channeled into a conservancy tank.
Carry out routine sampling and analysis of effluent from the station.
Apply for effluent discharge license from NEMA. 
Soil protection measures.
Proper disposal of wastes.


Solid waste generation


Reuse and recycling of material where possible such as dug out soil for backfilling.
Provision of solid waste receptacles.
Proper disposal of all wastes in provided bins.
Engagement of a licensed waste collector for waste collection.


Increased demand for water and electricity


Provision of adequate water storage facilities for use at the site.
Water and electricity conservation (saving measures).
Installation of water and electricity meters and monthly readings.
Provision of a standby generator.
Maximizing on natural lighting.
Rainwater harvesting.
Water re-use. 


Fire risk


Installation of firefighting equipment (fire extinguishers,  hose reels and buckets of sand.
Training station operators on fire fighting.
Administrative controls including no smoking at all, no naked fires etc.
Fire safety signage.
Conducting fire safety audits.


Occupational Health and safety impacts


Provision of suitable personal protective equipment.
Creation of health and safety awareness.
Provision of a first aid kit manned by a trained first aider.
Formulation and implementation of an health and safety policy.
Safety signage.
Reporting and recording of any accidents occurring at site.
Use of well-maintained and suitable machines and equipment. 
Use of permits to work for hazardous operations and tasks.


Impacts on traffic


Regulation of traffic to and from fuel station (as per intended use).
Develop and implement an appropriate traffic flow plan for the site in liaison with the Ministry of Roads, the Nairobi County Government and the Traffic Department.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413937         National Environment Management Authority.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4458
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED OUTSOURCING OF BIOMASS FUEL SUPPLY FOR SALT REFINING PLANT AT GONGONI, MAGARINI SUB-COUNTY KILIFI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Krystalline Salt Limited) is proposing to outsource Biomass for fuel supply to be used at Krystaline Salt Limited, at Gongoni, Magarini Sub-County Kilifi County.
The proposed project is designed to engage the local community farmers within Magarini Sub-County to plant Casuarina equestefolia, Azadirachta indica and cacia siamea in their farms that they will later sell exclusively to Krystalline Salt Limited Gongoni as wood biomass under agreed terms between the farmers and Krystalline Salt Limited. The project also involves Krstalline Salt Limited supporting local community members who will be involved in the project to boost fruit trees within their farms by planting Mangifera indica (Mango fruit tree), Cocos nucifera (Coconut tree) and Anacardium occidentale (cashewnut) as an incentives.
The following are the anticipated impacts and their proposed mitigation measures

Environmental and Social impacts


Mitigation measure


Food insecurity
 


Ensure that any land owned by the participating farmers in the out grower program that is used for food crop farming as at the time of commencement of the proposed project should remain under food production.
Participating farmers should maximize on the available opportunities within the out grower programme of boosting fruit trees crops by planting as many fruit trees seedling as possible as will be provided by the programme.
There should be no ferrying and or replacement of any fruit trees for biomass trees at all.
Participating farmers should be advised to ensure that they continually improve on the acreage of land for crop production.
Part of the proceeds (money) that will be received from the project (once the biomass is harvested) should be ploughed back into crop production including buying food staffs.


Reduced community livelihoods
 


Phased payments (before harvest of the trees is done) to the participating farmers should be done to ensure that the farmers are able to meet their financial obligation while they await tree crop to mature.
Participating farmers in the out grower programme to be encouraged to form a cooperative through which they can safe part of their earnings to increase their ability to borrow more and invest in other areas to improve their livelihoods.
Krystalline salt limited to explore possibility of organising avoidable financings for participating farmers for them to meet their financial obligations.


Depletion of soil nutrients
 


Ensure species of trees to be grown are capable of fixing atmospheric nitrogen back into the soil, this will contribute in improve local soil fertility.
Application of appropriate fertilizers and mulching to be undertaken under the direction and advice of a qualified Forest Extension Officer.
Krystalline salt limited to organise for appropriate extension services from qualified Foresters to the participating farmers through which they can learn on how to maintain soil fertility as they plant the trees.


Pets and dieses
 


Application of appropriate pesticides and fungicides to be done under the direction and guidance of a Forest Entomologist and pathologist Officer.
Appropriate tree silvcutural practices to be undertaken to deal with infected parts of trees.


Negation of carbon sequestration
 


Practice rotational harvesting of mature stand of trees in an area to minimise clear felling that will drastically reduce local carbon sink.
Juvenile trees in a stand due for harvest can be left to mature as mature trees are harvested.
Ensure that replanting of harvested areas is carried out within a short duration.


Habitat loss
 


Practice rotational harvesting of mature stand of trees in an area to minimise clear felling to retain sections of habitats within the planted area at any one given time.
Avoid uprooting of stamps of trees instead encourage coppicing for quick regeneration of new stands.
Avoid clearing and removal of undergrowth including grasses, forbs and shrubs during harvesting of the trees.


Loss of biodiversity
 


Practice rotational harvesting of mature stand of trees in an area to minimise clear felling to retain sections of habitats within the planted area at any one given time.
Avoid uprooting of stamps of trees instead encourage coppicing for quick regeneration of new stands.
Avoid clearing and removal of undergrowth including grasses, forbs and shrubs during harvesting of the trees.


Occupational injuries and or accidents
 


Tools and equipment to be used in harvesting the trees to be appropriately serviced and in good working condition.
Personnel involved in harvesting of trees to be appropriately trained and experienced.
Appropriate personal protective equipment to be provided to all personnel involved in harvesting of the trees.
Appropriate signs and notices to be strategically placed at locations where harvesting of trees is taking place to notify neighbours and other users of the area.
First aid facilities complete with trained first aiders to be available on site during tree harvesting.
Appropriate training of workers in basic occupational safety and health at the workplace to be undertaken.


Change in local microclimate
 


Practice rotational harvesting of mature stand of trees in an area to minimize clear felling to retain sections of habitats within the planted area at any one given time.
Avoid uprooting of stamps of trees instead encourage coppicing for quick regeneration of new stands
Avoid clearing and removal of undergrowth including grasses, forbs and shrubs during harvesting of the trees.


Noise and dust
 


Power saws and other equipment used in harvesting the trees to be appropriately serviced and maintained to minimize noise production.
Appropriate personal protective equipment to be provided to all personnel involved in harvesting of the trees.
Appropriate engineering controls and or modifications on working tools and equipment to be employed to minimize noise and dust generation.


Air emissions
 


Scrubbers to be installed in the chimney of the boilers to scrub out flue gases resulting from burning of biomass.
Monitoring of emissions from the chimney be carried out to ensure emissions are  contained within the allowable national and international limits


Occupational injuries and or accidents
 


Tools and equipment to be used in shredding the biomass to be appropriately serviced and in good working condition.
Personnel involved in shredding the biomass and feeding it into the boilers to be appropriately trained and experienced.
Appropriate personal protective equipment to be provided to all personnel.
First aid facilities complete with trained first aiders to be available at all times.
Appropriate training of workers in basic occupational safety and health at the workplace to be undertaken.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7268716         National Environment Management Authority.

