
				Page: 2472GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6457
STEERING COMMITTEE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL GREEN ECONOMY STRATEGY AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
APPOINTMENT
1.  IT IS notified for general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary for Environment, Water and Natural Resources has appointed a Steering Committee to develop a National Green Economy Strategy and Implementation Plan that will enhance transition towards a green economy for achieving sustainable and inclusive development in Kenya.
The Steering Committee shall comprise of the following members:
Richard L. Lesiyampe (Dr.)—(Chairperson);
Martha Cheruto—(Vice-Chairperson);
Alice A. Kaudia (Dr.);
Peter Odhengo;
Jackson Kiplagat;
Benson K. Kimani;
Kithinji Mutunga;
Hezekiah B. Okeyo;
Sammy T. Nyambari (Dr.);
Jane Nyakang’o;
Dorcas B. Otieno (Dr.);
Jepi Lentoijoni;
Irene Kamunge;
Joint Secretaries:
Charles C. Mutai (Dr.).
Thomas Musandu.
2.  The terms of reference of the Steering Committee shall be to:
(a) oversee the development and preparation of Green Economy Strategy and Implementation Plan (GESIP);
(b) prepare TORs and oversee the selection process of experts to provide technical support and supervise the technical inputs into the process – including the Thematic Working Groups (TWGs);
(c)  co-ordinate the formulation and implementation of a communication strategy on green economy and growth in Kenya that includes a mechanism to showcase the holistic approach towards addressing green economy initiatives in the county, national, regional and international;
(d) spearhead a national and county dialogue process and targeted advocacy on green economy;
(e)  develop a mechanism for strengthening and enhancing partnership for resource mobilization and innovative measures for the delivery and implementation of the GESIP;
(f)   ensure transparency, accountability and integrity in the GESIP process;
(g) co-ordinate the preparation of a results based monitoring, evaluation and reporting plan in consultation with other key stakeholders;
(h) develop a framework to support research and innovation for a Green Economy;
(i)   submit regular (and on demand) progress reports; draft and final Green Economy Strategy and Implementation Plan to the Principal Secretary, State Department of Environment and Natural Resources; and
(j)   Co-opt other members as the need arises.
The Secretariat of the Steering Committee shall be based at the Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resource, NHIF Building.
The term of the steering committee shall be a period of twelve (12)  months from the date of the publication of this Gazette Notice.
JUDI W. WAKHUNGU,
Cabinet Secretary,
Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources.

