
				Page: 350GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1093
STEERING COMMITTEE TO ESTABLISH THE NAIROBI METROPOLITAN AREA TRANSPORT AUTHORITY
Appointment
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary for Transport and Infrastructure, has constituted a Steering Committee consisting of the following—
Principal Secretary, Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, State Department of Transport—(Chairperson)
Members—
County Executive Committee Member in-charge of Roads and Transport, Nairobi County;
County Executive Committee Member in-charge of Roads and Transport, Kiambu County;
County Executive Committee Member in-charge of Roads and Transport, Kajiado County;
County Executive Committee Member in-charge of Roads and Transport, Murang’a County;
County Executive Committee Member in-charge of Roads and Transport, Machakos County;
Principal Secretary Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, State Department of Infrastructure; and
Principal Secretary Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.
The Terms of Reference of the Steering Committee are to oversee the establishment of an integrated, efficient, safe, reliable and sustainable transport system within the Nairobi Metropolitan Region; which will include:
(a) overseeing the development of an integrated transport strategy, based on evidence and transport planning best practice, for the Nairobi Metropolitan Region including links between transport and land use planning concerning all modes;
(b) the establishment of Nairobi Metropolitan Area Transport Authority
(c)  the management, development and delivery of an integrated public transport system in the Metropolitan Region, including undertaking and co-ordinating  all matters relating to Mass Rapid Transit System, prior to the establishment of the  Nairobi Metropolitan Area Transport Authority ;
(d) to oversee the establishment of a comprehensive traffic management strategy;
(e)  to oversee the establishment of a comprehensive parking management strategy, focusing on Nairobi City Centre as a priority; and
(f)   to oversee the establishment of a strategy for traffic signal control.
In the performance of its functions, the Steering Committee may—
(a) co-opt not more than three persons who possess the relevant expertise, skill and experience which it considers necessary and proper;
(b) carry out or commission such studies or research as may inform the Cabinet Secretary on the Decision;
(c)  solicit, receive and consider views from members of the public and other interest groups; and
(d) conduct any other activities required for the effective discharge of its mandate.
The Steering Committee shall regulate its own procedure.
The Steering Committee shall remain in office for a period of one year with effect from 1st March, 2015 or for such longer period as the Cabinet Secretary may prescribe by notice in the Gazette.
The Steering Committee shall—
(a) every three months, prepare and submit to the Cabinet Secretary reports of its progress;
(b) propose interim recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary within six months of its appointment; and
(c)  submit a final report and make final recommendations to the Cabinet Secretary within one year of its appointment.
The secretariat of the Steering Committee shall be at Transcom House, P.O. Box 52692–00200, Nairobi, and all communication shall be addressed to the Chairperson of the Steering Committee.
M. S. M. KAMAU,
Cabinet Secretary for Transport and Infrastructure. 

