
				Page: 383GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1200
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED EXPANSION OF KRYSTALLINE SALT LTD. MARERENI SALT WORKS ON LAND  REFERENCE NUMBER 13427 OFF MALINDI- LAMU ROAD, MARERENI SUB-LOCATION, FUNDI ISA LOCATION, GONGONI DIVISION, MAGARINI SUB-COUNTY KILIFI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Krystalline Salt Limited (Marereni) ) is proposing to expand Krystaline Salt Limited (Marereni salt works) on Land  Reference Number 13427 off Malindi- Lamu Road, Marereni Sub-Location, Fundi Isa Location, Gongoni Division, Magarini Sub-County Kilifi County.
The proposed expansion will involve construction of evaporators, dykes and one pump.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Vegetation clearing
 


Ensuring endemic species of plants at the proposed project site are preserved.
Mature trees including the large baobab trees to be preserved.
Vegetation within the seasonal wetland and at the periphery of the seasonal wetland to be preserved.
A twenty meter vegetation greenbelt to be maintained between the boundary of the adjacent learning institutions (Marereni Primary School and Marereni Secondary School) and the proposed project site and between the boundary of the adjacent farms and the proposed project site and between the boundary of the adjacent villages and the proposed project site.
Vegetation removal to be done in stages as opposed at once on the entire area to be developed.
Management to substantially invest in tree planting and developed in all open areas that are not earmarked for developed but are within the boundaries of the company land.
Management to support tree planting efforts outside company land but within the community to boost overall tree cover in the area to offset trees that will be lost from vegetation to be cleared at the proposed project site.


Disturbance of local and migratory fauna habitat including avifauna
 


Preserving key habitats of the fauna such as the large baobab trees.
Preserving the seasonal swamp which is a habitat for local amphibians and avifauna.
Identifying feeding areas of the fauna including avifauna and preserving them by maintaining pockets of vegetation within the proposed project site in identified strategic fauna feeding areas.
Ensuring there is no capturing and or removal of any fauna from the proposed project site during implementation.
Minimising noise and vibration from equipment activity during construction phase that might course some fauna to hyparnate and or relocate.
Maintain ecological sensitive vegetation that is essential for the sustenance of local fauna.


Blockage of the seasonal stream that drains water to seasonal swamp
Phasing out of the seasonal swamp
Phasing out of shallow wells at project site
 


Ensuring that the seasonal stream that drains its waters into the local seasonal swamp (Lake Sudi) is not blocked but left to flow as it is currently.
The section of the proposed project site occupied by the seasonal swamp (Lake Sudi) to be curved out of the area to be developed and maintained as undeveloped to sustain the seasonal swamp.
The vegetation within the seasonal swamp and around the seasonal swamp to be preserved for the preservation of the waters of the seasonal swamp and the fauna that live there in.
Any existing upstream seasonal swamps outside the proposed project site to be preserved.
Any downstream seasonal swamps outside the proposed project site to be preserved.


Environmental pollution from poor disposal of bitten and effluent
 


All solid waste to managed and disposed as provided for in the Environmental Management and Coordination (Waste Management) Regulations 2006.
All liquid waste to be managed and disposed as provided for in the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Water Quality) Regulations, 2006.
All bitten generated to be drained into properly constructed bitten ponds which are lined with impermeable material at the bottom to ensure no ground seepage of the bitten.
The bitten to be held in the bitten pond and be used to produce low grade salt i.e. cattle salt.
There should be no disposal of any bitten at any time to the environment.
Effluent from salt washing to be sent to settling tanks where particles settle down and before recycling back into the salt washing process.
There should be no disposal of any effluent from salt washing at any time into the environment.


Air, water and soil pollution from proposed project activities
 


All solid waste to managed and disposed as provided for in the Environmental Management and Coordination (Waste Management) Regulations 2006.
All liquid waste to be managed and disposed as provided for in the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Water Quality) Regulations, 2006.
All bitten generated to be drained into properly constructed bitten ponds which are lined with impermeable material at the bottom to ensure no ground seepage of the bitten.
The bitten to be held in the bitten pond and be used to produce low grade salt i.e. cattle salt.
There should be no disposal of any bitten at any time to the environment.
Effluent from salt washing to be sent to settling tanks where particles settle down and before recycling back into the salt washing process.
There should be no disposal of any effluent from salt washing at any time into the environment.


Occupational accidents, injuries and diseases arising from the work environment
 


All workers to be provided with appropriate personal protective equipment.
All workers to be trained in the appropriate use of personal protective equipment provided.
Management to enforce on the use of provided personal protective equipment.
Working equipment to be serviced and maintained on Schedule.
Workers to have the appropriate training on operation and use of work tools and equipment.
Workers to be appropriately trained in safety.
Equipment operating manuals to be provided.
Welfare facilities such as first aid boxes, canteen, potable water, changing rooms to be provided and maintained in good condition.
Pre- employment and post-employment medical examination of workers.

(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
KODIA D. BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/6901383         National Environment Management Authority.

