
				Page: 349GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1091
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA, 2010
THE TASK FORCE ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA 2010 TO FACILITATE VOTING IN THE GENERAL ELECTIONS AND REFERENDA BY KENYANS IN THE DIASPORA
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that pursuant to Article 38 (2) and (3) (a), (b) and Article 10 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs and International Trade has established “The Task Force on the Implementation of the Constitution to facilitate voting in General Elections and Referenda by Kenyans in the Diaspora:
1.  The Task Force shall comprise of the following—
Washington Oloo—(Chairperson);
Members:
Lucy Kiruthu,
Gregory Kivalya Somba,
Joseph Muriithi Kanyiri,
Scholastica Ndambuki,
Dennis Muhambe,
Karen Rono,
Kariuki Kimemia,
Immaculate Kassait,
Peter Oduge,
2.  The mandate of the Task Force shall be to advise on the modalities for facilitating the sensitization, registration and voting in General Elections and Referenda by Kenyans in the Diaspora. In particular, the Task Force shall:
(a) advise on profiling of Kenyans in Diaspora and eligible to vote;
(b) establish the extent to which Kenyans living abroad can progressively participate in General Elections and Referenda;
(c)  advise on possible registration and polling centers for Kenyans living abroad;
(d) advise on modalities for sensitizing Kenyans living abroad on Voting; and
(e)  advise on any other matter incidental to the above mandate that is not covered herein.
3.  In the performance of its functions the Task Force:
(a) shall report to the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs and International Trade;
(b) shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as it shall consider necessary for the prudent discharge of its functions;
(c)  may cause to be carried out such studies or research as may be relevant to its mandate;
(d) shall have all the powers necessary or expedient for the proper execution of its functions, including the power to regulate its own procedure;
(e)  may co-opt other members it may deem necessary for the discharge of its mandate; and
(f)   shall be entitled to appropriate allowances.
4.  The Task Force shall carry out its mandate and submit its report within 3 months from the date hereof.
5.  The Secretariat of the Task Force shall be based at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade.
6.  Written submissions can be sent to:
7.  The Task Force on the Implementation of the Constitution to facilitate voting in General Elections and Referenda by Kenyans in the Diaspora,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade.
Old Treasury Building,
P. O. Box 30551–00100, Nairobi.
Email address: diaspora@mfa.go.ke
Dated the 4th February, 2015.
AMINA C. MOHAMED,
Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs and International Trade.

