
				Page: 1536GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4208
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ON PLOT L.R. NO. PIONEER/LANGAS BLOCK/405, IN ELDORET MUNICIPALITY, UASIN GISHU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kings Square Limited) intends to put a Residential Estate along the Eldoret-Kisumu Road on plot L.R. No. Pioneer/Langas Block/405, in Eldoret Municipality, Uasin Gishu County.
The project will involve the construction of 52 maisonette units, a spacious lounge cum area, a large kitchen fitted with high quality fine veneered MDF cupboards, semi detached quarters, cloakroom/shower unit, balcony attached to the lounge, 208 apartment units, commercial/communal centre with shops, perimeter wall with electric fencing, parking space, fire equipment, borehole and generator backup among others.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Anticipated Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Charges in hydrogy/impended drainage


Proper installation of drainage structure. Install cascades to break the impact of water flowing in the drains.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures through proper design and maintenance. Design should be with respect to (water) peak run-off volumes (i.e. consider periods or seasons when there is high intensity of rainfall.
Provide granting to the drainage channels.


Soil erosion


Landscaping
Ensure management of excavation activities
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Provide soil erosion control structures on the steep sided during construction phase.
 Efficiency of erosion control measures.
Ensure standard farming methods on the provided gardens.
Compact loose soil.


Air Pollution


Control speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Discourage idling of vehicles
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase of excavated areas


Noise Pollution


Sensitize drivers of construction machinery on effect of noise
Maintain plant equipment.
Construction activities to restricted to daytime
Workers in the vicinity of high-level noise to wear safety and protective gear
Provide barriers such as walls and trees around site boundaries to provide some buffer against noise prorogation.


Oil Pollution


Proper storage, handling and disposal of oil wastes.
Maintenance of construction vehicles should be carried out in the contractors yard off the site
Provide oil interceptors along the drains leading from car wash and services bays.


Road Safety


Enforce speed limits for contraction vehicles especially along roads leading to the site.
Provide bill boards at the site/entrance to notify motorists about the development.


Public health and occupational safety


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure effective waste water management.
Design of sewerage system should be as provided in the plans.
Sensitize residents on environmental management.
Provision of Personal Protective Equipment.


Fire safety training/emergency response


Adapt effective emergency response plans involving all both during construction and occupation phases.
To enhance health and safety preparedness among stakeholders.
Ensure equipment is in good working condition..


Solid waste


Use of integrated solid waste management systems i.e source reduction, recycling, composing and re-use & Sanitary land filling.
Enhance co-operation between County authorities and the public/residents.
Adopt a centralized waste collection. Centre (WCC).
Provide dust bins to individual house and different trash bags (in colours) to effect waste segregation at source and disposal


Security


Provide security guards and facilities during construction period.
The gate should always be controlled by the security men, even during occupation.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Water and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Uasin Gishu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5021909              National Environment Management Authority.

