
				Page: 1528GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4198
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(NO. 17 OF 2012)
TAITA/TAVETA COUNTY GOVERNMENT
THE COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
REPORT TO THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY
Preamble
THIS report is prepared   in accordance with the Constitution and section 59 (1) (d) and (f) of County Government Act No 17 of 2012 which states that the County Public service Board shall:
(a) Prepare regular reports for submission to the county assembly on the execution of the functions of the Board;
(b) Evaluate and report to the county assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the county public service;
This report meets all the requirements in section 59 sub section (5) of the county Government Act. However it is noted that Sub section 6 of section 59 may not be complied with at this time because the County Government has not yet established the County Gazette in which this report is supposed to be published within 7 days after the report has been delivered to the county Assembly. However the report shall be gazetted in the Kenya Gazette.
Introduction
Taita/Taveta County Public Service Board is under County Government of Taita Taveta. It is established under Article 235 of the constitution and section 57 of the County Government Act No. 17 of 2012.It is a board corporate with perpetual succession and capable of suing and being sued. It comprises of a chairman and five members of board and a secretary as per section 58 of County Government Act. The members of the board are at 50 % gender balance. In terms of regional balance we have:
Mwatate – 1
Voi          - 1
Wundanyi -2
Taveta     - 2
The function and powers of County Public Serviced Board are stipulated in Section 59 of county government Act.
Functions and powers of a County Public Service Board
1.  The functions of the County Public Service Board shall be, on behalf of the county government, to—
(a) establish and abolish offices in the county public service;
(b) Appoint persons to hold or act in offices of the county public service including in the Boards of cities and urban areas within the county and to confirm appointments;
(c) exercise disciplinary control over, and remove, persons holding or acting in those offices as provided for under this Part;
(d) prepare regular reports for submission to the county assembly on the execution of the functions of the Board;
(e) promote in the county public service the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232;
(f)  evaluate and report to the county assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the county public service;
(g) facilitate the development of coherent, integrated human resource planning and budgeting for personnel emoluments in counties;
(h) Advise the county government on human resource management and development; 
(i)  Advise county government on implementation and monitoring of the national performance management system in counties
(j)  Make recommendations to the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, on behalf of the county government, on the remuneration, pensions and gratuities for county public service employees.
2.  In appointing a person as a secretary to a board of a city or an urban area under subsection (1)(a), the County Public Service Board shall ensure that such person is a certified public secretary of good professional standing.
3.  The reports under subsection (1)(d) shall contain the details of persons appointed including gender, persons with disabilities, persons from the minority and marginalized communities.
4.  In the performance of its functions under subsection (1)(e), the County Public Service Board shall have powers to—
(a) inform and educate county public officers and the public about the values and principles;
(b) recommend to the county government effective measures to promote the values and principles;
(c) assist county government in the formulation and implementation of programmes intended to inculcate in public officers the duty to uphold the values and principles;
(d) advise the county governments on their obligations under international treaties and conventions on good governance in the county public service
(e) visit any county public office or body with a view to assessing and inspecting the status of compliance with the values and principles;
(f)  investigate, on its own initiative or upon a complaint made by any person or group of persons, the violation of any values and principles;
(g) recommend to the relevant lawful authority, any necessary action in view of the violation of the values and principles by any person or public body;
(h) cooperate with other institutions working in the field of good governance in the public service; and
(i)  perform any other functions as the Board considers necessary for the promotion of the values and principles.
5.  The report by the County Public Service Board under subsection (1) (f) shall—
(a)   Be delivered each December to the county assembly;
(b)   Include all the steps taken and decisions made by the board;
(c)    Include specific recommendations that require to be implemented in the promotion and protection of the values and principles:
(d)   Include specific decisions on particulars of persons or public body who have violated the values and principles, including action taken or recommended against them;
(e)    Include any impediment in the promotion of the values and principles; and
(f)    Include the programmes the board is undertaking or has planned to undertake in the medium term towards the promotion of the values and principles.
6.  The Board shall publish a report required under this section in the county Gazette not later than seven days after the report has been delivered to the county assembly
Recruitment Of County Public Officers
1.  The County Public Service Board has so far finalized the recruitment of Sub County and Deputy Sub county Administrators and the officers have been deployed. See the details.  ANNEX 1
2.  The chief officer’s interviews were concluded and the names recommended to the Governor for appointment. This information is with held because the process of recruitment is not complete.
3.  The ward administrator recruitment is not finalized, because three wards did not attract qualified candidates and the same were re-advertised. These are Challa, Mwatate .and Kasigau.
4.  The posts of County Land Management board member was advertised but no single application was received.
5.  The position for ICT manager was filled competitively .See ANNEX 2.
6.  Interviews for various posts advertized on 21st September 2013 are ongoing i.e.
-  Head of Treasury (Accounting, Budgeting and Audit).
- Head of Supply chain management.
-Head of county Human resource.
- Human Resource.
- Principal information
- Information officer
- Senior secretaries
- Chief Drivers.
7.  The county policing Authority members’ are yet to be short listed and interviewed.
Advertisements of positions to be widely publicized
The County Public Service Board adhered to section 66 of the CGA and advertised all positions in the two widely circulated dailies- Nation and Standard Newspaper.
Matters to take into account during appointments
The County Public service board ensured compliance with section 65 of CGA by requesting the candidate to meet the requirements of CAP 6 and other criteria outlined therein.
Include specific recommendations that require to be implemented in the promotion and protection of the values and principles
 The board has prepared a circular on how the County Government is to implement programmes that will help promote and protect the National Values and principles and the Principles of Public service. ANNEX 3 
Leadership And Integrity
The County Public service board has facilitated the filling of wealth declaration forms as required by law and the same is ongoing.
The board has not yet done any promotions so far. The board plans to revise / customize the terms and conditions and also develop other policy documents by the second quarter next calendar year.
Future Plans
The board has set out plans to be implemented as outlined below.

Priorities 


Strategies 

Establish the Office of the CPSB and in tandem, a working and functional Secretariat.
Obtain office space, the necessary instruments like seals etc,computers and other attached Resources.
Survey of the Human Capital status and needs analysis.

 
 

Head Count and Comprehensive HR Audit.

Establishing and abolishing posts as per legal requirements.


Recruitment, re-designation and
-    Regulation of persons on contract.
-    Retirement
-    Appointment of persons to Boards

Recognition of the need for the representation of persons with disabilities, minority and marginalized communities.


Take  necessary steps to include them in the
Public Service

Promote , in the County Public Service, the values and Principles as espoused in Articles  10 & 232 of the constitution


Ensure promotion of values and Principles

Exercise disciplinary control.


Recommend to the relevant Authority
Necessary action in view of any violations, but institute disciplinary Action if    any in our jurisdiction.

Advise the County Government on HR Management and Development.


Same, communicate to them.

Advise County Government on implementation & monitoring of National performance Management systems.


Liaise with the relevant bodies like PSCK on
This  and Report to the Executive

Reports production every December to the County Assembly.


Communicate the Reports to the relevant
Bodies.


10. Advise the County Government on HR Management and Development.


Same, communicate to them.


11. Advise County Government on implementation & monitoring of National performance Management systems.


Liaise with the relevant bodies like PSCK on
This  and Report to the Executive


12. Reports production every December to the County Assembly.


Communicate the Reports to the relevant
Bodies.

Seminars and workshops attended by the County Public Service Board members
Laptrust – Eldoret—28th and 29th October, 2013.
ICPSK and CMA   - NRB— 31st October, 2013 and 1st November, 2013.
County Public Boards forum – Mombasa—20th -22nd November 2013.
Intergovernmental workshop – Voi wildlife lodge 28th – 30th November, 2013.
Job evaluation workshop - NRB    - 31st October, 2013.
Conclusion 
We appreciate that the Public has high expectations on service delivery from the Government e.g. 
Involvement in the Policy decision making of the County
Efficient and effective Service delivery
Prudent use of public resources
Provision of accurate and prompt information
We therefore urge all stakeholders to collaborate and work together so that we may all achieve our mandates as envisaged in the constitution.
God Bless Taita/Taveta County. God Bless Kenya.
BASIL TANGAI NGOMA,
Chairman,
MR/5048223/5048211            County Public Service Board

