
				Page: 1533GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4205
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL HOUSING ESTATE AND ATTENDANT ANCILLARY SERVICES (KISIMA PARK), ON PLOT L.R. NOS. 343/2, 343/3, 343/9, 343/10, AND 343/11 IN LUKENYA AREA, MACHAKOS COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kisima Real Estate Limited) is proposing to develop a Residential Housing Estate and attendant ancillary services (Kisima Park), on Plot L.R. Nos. 343/2, 343/3, 343/9, 343/10, and 343/11in Lukenya area, Machakos County.
The development will involve the construction of 2,039 both residential maisonettes and bungalows; establish a community water supply borehole, a school, a shopping mall, hotel and a hospital.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Disturbance to fauna and flora


Maintain a 15m distance from the river bank
Confirm sites and locations in order to avoid areas of existing vegetation.
Undertake tree planting after completion of construction works.


Soil Degradation


Excavated soil to be used for back filling
Develop soil erosion management measure.
Limit the use of heavy machinery.
Control earth works.


Air emissions


Spray water on dry rough roads during dry weather to suppress dust.
Cover loads of friable materials during transportation.
Control speed of construction vehicles and switch off machines when not in use.
Provide PPE e.g. noise masks to workers.


Sewage and effluent


Routine checkups and monitoring of the sewage treatment plants to avoid leakages and blockages.
The proposed capacity of the WWTPs is sufficient to accommodate the anticipated people.
Proper construction of WWTPs will be done to meet the standards required by Mavoko sub-county.
Construction of separate storm water and waste water drains.


Noise Pollution


Provide and enforce use of PPE e.g. ear muffs
Proper servicing of machinery and equipment (oiling and greasing)
Construction activities to be carried out between 8am and 5pm
Monitor noise levels as per NEMA guidelines


Increase in solid waste


Solid waste to be put in designated areas for appropriate disposal
Waste separation to allow for waste recycling
Engage a competent and effective waste handler


Occupational health and safety


Personnel to stick to standard operation procedures
Personnel to wear complete protection gear
Provision of firefighting equipment
Put in place an emergency response plan.
Put in place guideline for operation of machinery and appliances and ensure workers are aware of the same.
Comply with Kenyan safety policy and safe working procedures, laws and regulations


Human sanitation and waste management


Provision of sufficient sanitary conveniences and hand washing stations, and toilets
Ensure proper containment of disposal of sanitary waste

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Machakos County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048090              National Environment Management Authority.

