
				Page: 1476GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5368
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE IMARISHA LAKE NAIVASHA MANAGEMENT BOARD
IT IS NOTIFIED for the information of the general public that the Prime Minister of the Republic of Kenya has appointed a Board to be known as Imarisha Lake Naivasha Management Board for managing the Lake Naivasha Catchment Restoration Programme whose aim is to restore Lake Naivasha and its catchment.
2. The terms of reference of the Board shall be to
 
(a) develop a programme (“Imarisha Naivasha Programme”) to co-ordinate the activities of various players engaged in the conservation of the lake and its catchment, and for that purpose to review and approve projects;
(b) monitor compliance with the laws and regulations governing the environment of the lake and its catchment in collaboration with the relevant Ministries;
(c)  develop and enforce codes of conduct to be observed by the players in order to improve the environment and establish sustainability of the lake and its catchment in partnership with the relevant stakeholders;
(d) develop, adopt and execute a Trust or other instrument to receive financial resources from within or outside Kenya to finance the implementation of programmes, for which the Board shall be fully accountable for proper and prudent management and for the loss of which it shall be liable;
(e)  collaborate with all the stakeholders, including research institutions and promote their active participation in the Imarisha Naivasha Programme within the lake and its catchment;
(f)   report on a quarterly basis to the Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee constituted hereunder and seek guidance on policy and technical from the Committee.
 
(g) perform any other tasks as requested by the Inter – Ministerial Technical Committee.
3. The Board shall comprise
               
(a)     the Permanent Secretary in Ministry responsible for the environment;
(b)     the District Commissioner, Naivasha District;
(c)      the Mayor of the Naivasha Municipal Council;
(d)     Andrew Koisamoi, representing pastoralists;
(e)      Mary Njoki, representing Catchment Water User Associations;
(f)       Lord Andrew Enniskelin, representing Lake Naivasha Riparian Association;
(g)     Richard Fox, representing Lake Naivasha Growers Group;
(h)     Mary Njuguna, representing Community Forest Association;
(i)       Raphael Ikiba, representing Beach Management Units;
(j)       Mark Kariuki, representing Naivasha local business community and tourism industry;
(k)      Anderson Koyo, representing civil society organizations.
4. The Board, for the purpose of performance of its functions -
(a)     shall meet at such places and at such times as the Board shall consider desirable;
 
(b)     may cause such studies or researches to be undertaken as may inform the Board of its mandate;
 
(c)      may co-opt such individual or institutions as it may deem appropriate;
 
(d)     shall report serious breaches of the law to the Minister responsible for matters relating to the environment and the Prime Minister.
5. The Board may regulate its own procedures and may issue guidelines with respect to the orderly conduct of its proceedings, the quorum for the transaction of its business and other related matters.
6.  The Secretariat of the Board shall be based at the Office of the Prime Minister and shall comprise a Secretary and such number of staff as may be deemed appropriate by the Board.
7.  The term of the Board shall be a period of one year with effect from 5th April, 2011 and is renewable annually.
8. (1) There shall be an inter-Ministerial Technical Committee which shall comprise of –
 
(a)     the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, who shall be  chairperson;
(b)     the Economic Advisor to the Prime Minister,  who shall be co-chairperson;
(c)      the Assistant Director of Programmes in the Ministry responsible for the environment, who shall be Secretary;
(d)     one representative each from the  Ministries responsible for –
(i)    finance;
(ii)     local government;
(iii)    water and irrigation;
(iv)    agriculture;
(v)     tourism;
(vi)    forestry and wildlife;
(vii)  energy;
(viii) fisheries; development;
(ix)    livestock development;
(x)     public health and sanitation; and
(xi)    lands.
(2)  The Committee shall 

