
				Page: 1515GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5343
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT ON L.R. NO. MACHAKOS TOWN/BLOCK II/280, MACHAKOS DISTRICT
Pursuant to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) regulations, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the implementation of the proposed upgrade of a petrol station
The proposed project entails upgrading the canopy over the pumps, upgrading the sales office, rehabilitating the drainage system, replacing the underground fuel tanks, repairing the drive ways, walkways, acceleration and deceleration lanes, installing the Interceptor Tank and upgrading the washrooms.
The project is located at Machakos town, a few metres from the junction of Machakos turn off and Ngei road directly opposite the newly opened Naivas supermarket. The plot measures approximately 0.1189 Ha. The Land reference number is L.R No Machakos Town/Block 11/280.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Air pollution
 


Control speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Spray water on excavated areas.
Maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Sensitize construction workers.
All bare areas should be landscaped after construction.
Workers should be provided with dust masks if working in sensitive areas


Noise pollution


Maintain plant equipment.
Construction should be carried out only during daytime i.e 0800 – 1700 HRS.
Workers to wear ear muffs if working in noisy section.
Management to ensure that noise from the station is kept within reasonable levels.

 


Traffic density


Proper signage put in place to notify neighbours of the activity and presence of heavy vehicles and to direct traffic.
Presence of boards directing patrons to the site.
Strict adherence to traffic rules.


Soil erosion & compaction


Provide soils conservation structures on the areas prone to soil erosion to reduce impact of erosion.
There should be designated pathways and driveways for movement to avoid unnecessary compaction.
All bare areas should be well landscaped after completion.


Solid waste


Construction debris should be collected by a licensed private contracted waste collection company.
Excavation waste should be re-used or backfilled.
Waste generated should be collected by a privately contracted waste collection company and the contractor should ensure the construction of a central waste collection point with bulk storage facilities.
The site should have waste receptacles with bulk storage facilities at convenient points to prevent littering during occupation.


Oil leaks and spills


Machinery should be well maintained to prevent oil leaks.
Contractor should have a designated area where maintenance is carried out and that is protected from rain water.
All oil products should be stored in a site store and handled carefully.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Loss of vegetation


Designate access pedestrian routes and parking zones that are cabro paved.
Provide signs marked do not Walk/ Park on the grass.
The flora and fauna should be restored after construction by landscaping and maintaining the introduced plants.


Occupational Health and Safety


Provide Personal Protective Equipment.
Train workers on personal safety and how to handle equipments and machines.
Report any accidents / incidences and treat and compensate affected workers.
Provide sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences which should be kept clean.
The site will be fenced off using iron sheets during renovation.


Security
 


The site will be fenced off using iron sheets during renovation.
Demolish all temporary kiosks on site.
Round the clock security for the facility.
Adequate lighting and an alarm system installed at strategic points.


Oil leaks and spills
 


Machinery should be well maintained to prevent oil leaks.
Contractor should have a designated area where maintenance is carried out and that is protected from rain water.
All oil products should be stored in a site store and handled carefully.


Fire preparedness


Fire fighting drills carried out regularly.
Fire fighting emergency response plan.
Ensure all firefighting equipment is regularly maintained, serviced and inspected.
Fire hazard signs and directions to emergency exit, route to follow and assembly point in case of any fire incidence.


Disturbed Physical environment


Undertake a complete environmental restoration programme.
Landscaping and introducing appropriate vegetation.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kapiti Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Eastern Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Machakos District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1681643            National Environment Management Authority.

