
				Page: 657Gazette Notice No. 1659
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED KAPESE INTEGRATED SUPPORT BASE IN TURKANA COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Tullow Kenya B.V) is proposing to an Integrated Support Base in Turkana County.
The proposed ISB is about 1.3 km2 in area and will comprise a 400 man camp and training Centre; Tullow offices; A fuel storage facility; A truck parking facility; A security camp; Upgrading the runway to accommodate large aircraft such as the Hercules L100-30 and Dash 8 Bombardier, Water supply from boreholes for work areas; storage/yard space, segregated work sites for Tullow and contractors, office space, waste management facility and refueling facility and Site drainage for the ISB.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental And Social Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Lack of formal EHS policy and management system


Tullow will roll out their EHS Policy for all persons working at the project site.
Tullow will develop a localized risk based EHS management system for activities to be carried out within the Kapese Integrated Support Base.
Each contractor will be required to develop a local EHS management system specific to their activities at the project site.


Impacts associated with traffic safety


All project related traffic (construction and operational phases) will be managed in accordance with the Tullow’s Land Transport Policy and its associated documentation, and relevant sections of the Traffic Act.
Safety requirements shall be complied with at all times.


Improper setup and operation of contractor’s work area


Each contractor shall minimize the size of their construction camp and provide adequate drainage around it.
Tullow and its contractors shall ensure that all wastewater discharged from the project site during its lifetime, complies with the requirements of L.N. 120: Environment Management and Co-ordination (Water Quality) Regulations, 2006.
All types of wastes generated by the project shall be handled in accordance with the applicable requirements of L.N. 121: Environment Management and Co-ordination (Waste Management) Regulations, 2006.


Lack of formal EHS training for field staff and contractors


Tullow and its contractors shall provide mandatory EHS induction training for all persons working at the project site.
Each contractor shall provide their staff with formalized EHS training in accordance with the requirements of OSHA, EMCA and internal company EHS policies.


Impacts related to surface water


Tullow and its contractors shall provide ablution facilities as required by the Public Health Act.
All materials including hazardous materials shall be properly stored to avoid any sub-surface soil and ground water contamination.


Impacts associated with operations and maintenance of individual work areas


Tullow and its contractors shall always adhere to EHS related laws and regulations in Kenya and international best practices.
Tullow and its contractors will develop and implement a preventive and predictive maintenance program for all equipment used at the project site.
Tullow and its contractors shall develop and implement a formal Emergency Response Plan (ERP) based on anticipated risk scenarios.


Impacts on biodiversity


Tullow should ensure that their contractors excavate only those areas required by the project footprint. Tullow, through their contractors should provide biodiversity offsets wherever flora is cut down.
Tullow will implement its Alien Invasive Species Plan for the project.


Impacts on health and safety


Tullow and its contractors shall comply as a minimum with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2007 (OSHA) and its applicable subsidiary legislation throughout the pre-construction, construction, operational and decommissioning phases respectively.
Tullow and its contractors will implement their internal health and safety management systems to eliminate or reduce to As Low As Reasonably Practical (ALARP) potential health and safety risks throughout the life cycle of the project.


Social impacts associated with the project


Tullow will implement a formal Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for the project. Tullow should develop, roll-out and implement a documented Communication Plan for continual engagement with the community.
Tullow will develop and implement a formal Grievance Mechanism for the project with timely resolution of all grievances.
Tullow and its contractors should give first priority for all jobs to the local community.
Tullow and its contractors should make a conscious effort to provide vocational training by offering technical training required for various work activities to be carried out within the Kapese Integrated Support Base.


Impacts associated with Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)


Tullow and its contractors should implement their respective CSR programs in order to get a “social license to operate”. The CSR program should be based on thematic needs of the local community such as water, health, sanitation, education, etc.


Impacts on cultural heritage


All workers whether from within the project area or any other part of Kenya or outside of it must always comply with the cultural heritage of the host community.
For the construction phase, Tullow and its contractors will develop a “Chance Finds Procedure” for any potential archaeological or paleontological finds.

(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Turkana County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7054110           National Environment Management Authority.

