
				Page: 1517GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5344
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED ONE STOP BORDER POST (OSBP) AT NAMANGA IN KENYA AND TANZANIA
 
Pursuant to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) regulations, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the implementation of the proposed one stop border stop (OSBP).
The proposed project involves the following
Cordoning and fencing an area, approximately 6.5 hectares, which will be designated as the border control zone (BCZ), within which access, will be to those persons crossing the border or offering services;
Construction of roads to bypass the BCZ, approximately 1.5km long;
Construction of parking areas for trucks crossing the border within the BCZ;
Construction of an office complex, verification sheds and warehouses;
Construction and installation of an incinerator for disposal of impounded goods and animals and also solid waste;
Installation of support mechanical, electrical and security devices and services;
Construction of civil engineering services including water supply and waste treatment plants;
Construction of other minor buildings and infrastructure to support the operation of the border post.
The project is situated at Namanga border between Kenya and Tanzania, a distance of approximately 136km on the Kenyan side. On the Tanzanian side, the border is approximately 106km from Arusha. The proposed project is located in Namanga town, Namanga division of Kajiado district.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures;

Possible impacts


Mitigation measures


Land Acquisition and Resettlement
 


The Full Report of land acquisition and resettlement and related socio-cultural impacts and mitigation measures to the community has been presented in Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) Report.
Land acquisition and resettlement will be carried out in accordance with Kenya’s, AfDB and JICA Resettlement laws. The compensation and resettlement will be guided by the principle objectives that the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) will have their former living standards and income-earning capacity improved or at least restored. The PAPs must be provided with adequate support during the transition period.


Spread of Communicable Diseases
 


The contractor shall abide by the waste management regulations and rules described in Legal Notice No. 121 of the Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 69 of September 2006;
Treating affected local and migrant populations shall also be used in controlling the movement of disease vectors (through contaminated water and between people);


Possible impacts


Mitigation measures


 


Accomplished through a comprehensive health awareness campaign will include preventive measures such as immunizing the vulnerable population, and educating people about diseases and how they are contracted, and how to avoid them by using treated water and keeping living areas cleaner.
Deposit of segregated refuse in pits should be accompanied by daily covering with a firm layer of earth. These sites should be out of site, downwind and in a dry and properly drained site;
Provision of personal hygiene facilities in good condition with adequate water supply;
Awareness raising on proper sanitation and personal hygiene to promote proper health;


Sexually Transmitted Infections and HIV / AIDS
 


The Resident Engineer should ensure that management of STIs occurrences due to social interaction between immigrant workers and local populations is conducted through:
Selecting appropriate locations for construction camps;
Education and sensitization of workers and the local communities on STIs including provision of condoms to the project team and the public;
Formation of peer groups from among the project staff to ensure continuity in training and awareness raising;
The contractor has to institute HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention campaign amongst workers for the duration of the contract e.g. erect and maintain HIV/AIDS information posters at prominent locations as specified by the Resident Engineer;
The contractor has to ensure that staff are made aware of the risks of contracting or spreading sexually transmitted diseases;
The contractor shall ensure that the project workers are sensitized on the local culture;
The contractor shall ensure the mobilization and sensitization of the general population on reproductive health and STIs;
During the operation period KRA and Ministry of Immigration should work closely with various HIV/AIDS organizations working in the project zone of influence in order to achieve the best results. The following should also be done:
Establishment of training and awareness campaigns at the project site;
Establishment and maintenance of peer counseling groups to ensure constant awareness and support groups among the staff both during the operation period.


Spread of the phenomenon of adultery


Where possible conduct regular sensitization campaigns and monitoring and evaluation of the modes used during the two year course of the project;


Possible impacts


Mitigation measures


 


Formation of peer groups from among the project staff to ensure continuity in training and awareness raising;
Establishment of training and awareness campaigns at the project site;
Establishment and maintenance of peer counseling groups to ensure constant awareness and support groups among the staff both during the operation period.


Land capability and potential


Compensation for landowners should be done according to the RAP Report.


Solid waste generation
 


Contractor shall consult with Olkejuado County Council on suitable location for disposal of waste that can’t be recycled
Diligence on the part of the Contractors during construction activities will minimize the amount of debris, and also will ensure that debris is disposed of in a sensible manner, at a specified and approved dump.
All solid waste generated during construction and operation should be carefully monitored, collected, stored, and taken out of the site for disposal.
Waste generated during the operation of the facility must be segregated at source, inventorised and appropriate methods of disposal determined.
The development and rehabilitation of spoil areas shall include the following activities:
Stripping and stockpiling of topsoil;
Removal (to a nominal depth of 500mm) and stockpiling of subsoil;
Placement of spoil material;
Contouring of spoil site to approximate natural topography and drainage and/or reduce erosion impacts on the site;
Placement of excavated subsoil and then topsoil over spoil material;
Contouring and re-vegetation;
The Contractor shall ensure that the placement of spoil is done in such a manner to minimize the spread of materials and the impact on surrounding vegetation and that no materials ‘creep’ into ‘no-go’ areas.


Geology and Topography
 


The Contractor shall ensure that appropriate pre blast monitoring records are in place (i.e. photographic and inspection records of structures in close proximity to the blast area);
The Contractor shall ensure that emergency services are notified, in writing, a minimum of 24 hours prior to any blasting activities commencing on site;
The Contractor shall take necessary precautions to prevent damage to special features and the general environment, which includes the removal of fly-rock.  Environmental damage caused by blasting/drilling shall be repaired at the Contractor’s expense;


Possible impacts


Mitigation measures


 


The Contractor shall ensure that adequate warning is provided to the local communities immediately prior to all blasting. All signals shall also be clearly given;
The Contractor shall use blast mats for cover material during blasting.  Topsoil shall not be used as blast cover;
A soil conservation programme, including measures for storm water and flooding control, will be implemented as a part of the EMP. Pre-construction and construction activities should take place in the dry season in order to avoid storm water and flooding.


Wastewater pollution
 


No grey water runoff or uncontrolled discharges from the site/working areas (including wash down areas) to adjacent River Oldonyo Rok shall be permitted;
Water containing such pollutants as cements, concrete, lime, chemicals and fuels shall be discharged into a conservancy tank for removal from site.  This particularly applies to water emanating from concrete batching plants and concrete swills;
The Contractor shall also prevent runoff loaded with sediment and other suspended materials from the site/working areas from discharging to adjacent river;
Potential pollutants of any kind and in any form shall be kept, stored and used in such a manner that any escape can be contained and the water table not endangered;
Wash areas shall be placed and constructed in such a manner so as to ensure that the surrounding areas (including groundwater) are not polluted;
The Contractor shall notify the RE of any pollution incidents on site.


Noise  emission and vibration


Provision of PPE’s to the workers;
Noise levels shall be kept within acceptable limits and construction activities shall, where possible, be confined to normal working hours;
Contractor shall cordon-off work areas;
Any complaints received by the Contractor regarding noise will be recorded and communicated to the RE.


Surface water (nearby river) contamination
 


During construction, spills shall be contained and a rapid clean-up process should occur to prevent any potential contaminants from entering the river. Standard Operation Protocols should be strictly adhered to in order to prevent and minimize spillages,
The Resident Engineer and the contractor shall ensure that there is always a supply of absorbent material such as saw dust on site during construction, readily available to absorb/breakdown spill from machinery or oil storage;
No construction materials shall be stockpiled within areas that are at risk of flooding;
All temporary and permanent fill used adjacent to the river bed shall be of clean sand or larger particles.  Silts and clays shall not be permitted in the fill;


Possible impacts


Mitigation measures


 


Plastic sheeting, sandbags or geofabric approved by the RE shall be used to prevent the migration of fines through the edges of the fill into the river;
The Contractor shall not modify the banks or bed of a watercourse other than necessary to complete the specified works.  If such unapproved modification occurs, the Contractor shall restore the affected areas to their original profile;
The Contractor shall preserve all riparian vegetation;
The Contractor shall not pollute the watercourse through any construction activities.


Air quality degradation
 


All construction machinery shall be maintained and serviced in accordance with the manufacturers specifications;
The contractor shall water dusty areas during construction;
Dust generating activities shall not be carried (excavation, handling and transport of soils) during times of strong winds.  The Resident Engineer shall suspend earthworks operations wherever visible dust is affecting properties adjoining the work site;
Vehicles delivering soil materials shall be covered to reduce spills and windblown dust.


Groundwater contamination
 


Blasting should be avoided near boreholes supplying portable water used for agricultural purposes;
Berms should be constructed on site to ensure all rainfall runoff remains onsite and is diverted to oil/water separator.


Handling of environmentally hazardous chemicals
 


The contractor will to have to prepare a Waste Management Plan before start of construction activities;
During operations all the hazardous waste from all Departments must be incinerated as proposed in the Design.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kapiti Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Rift Valley Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Kajido North District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1680206          National Environment Management Authority.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5345
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED FILLING STATION ON L.R NO KERICHO/CHESINENDE/234 IN KIPKERION DIVISION, KERICHO DISTRICT
Pursuant to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit regulations, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed filling station.
The project will involve the construction of a filling station comprising of ; 3 dispensing pumps (1 for petrol, 1 for diesel and 1 for kerosine), 3 udergrond storage tanks, a canopy, tire centre, office block (lubricants shop, reception, office and toilets).
The proposed project will be located along Nakuru –Kericho Highway at a place called Chesinende on l.r no kericho/chesinende/234 in kipkerion division, kericho district
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures;

Potential Impact


Mitigation measures


Waste generation and disposal


Solid waste should be managed according to the waste management regulations.
The proponent should contract a licensed waste collector.


Air and Noise
pollution


Contractor will give prior notice of activities and time durations to neighboring building occupants.
Dust masks should be provided to workers to limit inhalation of the dust.
Switch off engines when not being used
Most of the construction work to be done manually to reduce noise impact
Fencing the site to avoid spread of dust
Employees likely to be exposed to high noise levels to be provided with ear protectors
The contractor should obtain a noise permit from NEMA.
Measures will be put in place to ensure use of serviced and greased equipment and earmuffs by operators
Sprinkle water on dusty surfaces
Place the concrete in well ventilated area
Ensure the workers wear proper PPEs (including dust masks)


Accidents


Workers should be provided with the necessary PPEs such as helmets
Warning signs should be provided at the site warning people of potential/possible accidents.
Materials like iron bars should be properly lowered and not thrown or shot down from heights liable to cause damage, harm or injury to workers or passers-by.


Blockage of storm drainage system


Ensure that storm drainage system remains clear during construction
Soil from the site which is not in use should be properly disposed


Potential Impact


Mitigation measures


Noise and
vibrations


Construction activities must be carried between 0800hrs and 1700hrs.
Use light vibrators
Regular servicing of machines and equipment
Lubrication of machines
Compliance with noise and Vibration regulations


Occupational health
 and safety


Provision of PPEs to workers during construction time
The PPEs should include Overalls/Aprons, helmet, dust masks, wielding shield/goggles, ear muffs or plugs (where necessary), and appropriate footwear
Provide first aid facilities emergency plan at the site
Fencing off the developing project to avoid risks to the general public
Supervision of  the project should be done throughout the project implementation period



Fire risks


Install fire extinguishers at the filling station
Clearly mark fire exit points and the fire assembly area
Provide sand buckets at strategic locations
Workers should be trained on fire fighting skills by a
qualified trainer
Fire drills should be conducted at least once a year
A fire fighting team should be established
Warning and informational signs should be displayed appropriately
Conduct fire audit once a year
Formulate and bring to the notice of all workers and clients fire safety policy and rules
Regular testing and servicing of fire-fighting equipment and appliances.
Full compliance with the Fire Risk reduction Rules, 2007


Oil spills


Pumps should be inspected regularly
Pump valves should be well fitted
Dispenser pipes and underground tanks should be of approved quality standard
Regular monitoring to detect leakages from tanks and pipes
Install an oil interceptor in the drainage system
Recovery of waste oil for proper disposal by authorized agent
Use oil absorbent material to clean oil spills especially at the service bay
Regular checking/monitoring of the drainage lines, interceptor and the water pump to ensure that are working effectively without any overflow or failures.
Ensure that the underground tanks are compliant with Kenya standards (KS2000:2002)
Conduct pressure tests before commissioning of the station to ensure that the product lines (pipe works) comply with KS 1969:2006, KS 1967: 2006 and 1968:2006.


Solid waste management


Provision of rubbish bins.


Potential Impact


Mitigation measures


 


Segregation of wastes at the source
Waste should be disposed at the designated site
Solid waste should be managed according to the waste management regulations.
The proponent should contract a licensed waste collector.


Liquid waste management


Maintain cess pit; dispose of sludge by NEMA licensed companies.
Ensure manhole lid is always closed.
Conduct careful analysis of soils and subsurface geology and incorporate correct placement to avoid ground water contamination 
provision of a reliable water supply                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kapiti Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Rift Valley Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Kericho District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1944132          National Environment Management Authority.
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5577
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIROMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CHANIA MATAARA SMALL-HYDROPOWER STATION IN MATAARA LOCATION, GATUNDU NORTH DISTRICT
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) regulations, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the implementation of the proposed Chania Mataara Small-hydropower.
The proposed small-hydropower plant is projected to supply power to the Kenya Tea Agency, Power Company.
The proposed plant will be developed along River Chania which is located in Thika District, Gatanga Constituency, Kariara Division, Kiarutara Sub-Location, Kamukobini village. The proposed Small-Hydropower project is located about 0.5Km from Mataara Tea Factory.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
 

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Biological Diversity
 


Planting of grass and trees species that would be destroyed, flowers and grass within the proposed Small-Hydropower station site.
Planting trees, grass and flowers has been done and will continue to be done to improve on the landscape quality of the small-hydropower station compound and also acts as windbreakers.
Special attention paid to propagation of the endangered tree species especially Prunus Africana.
Tree species to be planted to rehabilitate the site and improve the aesthetic value of the small hydropower station compound.


Land degradation
due to increase soil erosion


Terraces to be constructed at appropriate places at the site and suitable plants and grass species planted.
Extra roads to be constructed as narrow as possible and along the contour in consultation with Kenya forest.
Service (KFS) and Ministry of Roads and Public Works as necessary.
Rip-off compacted for planting of trees.
Footpaths to be protected with appropriate grass species, stones or appropriate environmentally friendly measures that would prevent soil erosion.
Avoid use of heavy machinery.
Use water bowsers to minimize dust pollution.
Control earth works.


Siltation


Ensure de-silting is done regularly at a minimal rate.


Physical
environmental
destruction(land scarification)


Avoid use of heavy machinery.
Use water bowsers to minimize dust pollution
Control earth works.
Roads rip-off and re-vegetation after construction.


Wastes disposal


Waste disposal containers will be placed at strategic places where wastes are sorted out into biodegradable, and non-biodegradable.
Solid wastes such as plastics, papers, and bottles will be collected for recycling.While papers and other wastes that cannot be recycled are burnt in the compost pit or incinerator.
Wastes such as green leaves will be used to produce compost manure for flower gardens to improve soil fertility and also planting trees and flowers later at the small-Hydropower station site.
Waste water to be disposed into water sanitation system and exhausted for disposal as need arises.


Environmental
pollution through
oil, petrol and diesel spillage.


Minimize accidental spillage of oils, petrol and diesels.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


 


Where they occur, immediate collection and treatment of site is recommended.


 


Dispose wastewater using environmentally sound methods.


 


Dispose machinery pollutants using environmentally sounds methods.


 


Ensure machinery and equipment are well serviced to reduce leaks.


 


Construct storage fuel tanks away from regular activities in compliance with Energy bill, 2003.


Occupational health
hazards or issues
during construction
and after


Provision of adequate personal protective gear/equipment to workers such as gloves and gum boots to workers during construction  work.
Use of water to reduce effect of dust on workers and the environment.
Erect warning signs.
Fence where necessary
HIV and AIDS, VCT and Health Support Clinic within the small-hydropower station area.


Personal Safety such as workforce accidents by unsafe working practices


Guard all moving parts of machines; provide personal protective clothing and ensure they are used;
Display for all to read health, safety and environmental management policies
Compliance to the provisions of the EHS management plan to safeguard workers.
Prepare and print safety manual for distribution to workers. Contract an EHS Consultant to police workers with the view to ensure provisions of the EHS regulations are adhere to.
Provide protective gear for example overalls, hard hats (helmets), and safety boots among others.


Air, dust and noise
pollution


Dust masks to be provided to workers to limit 42 inhalation of the dust.
Contractor will give prior notice of activities and time durations to neighboring households.
Watering dusty ground before excavation begins.
Measures will be put in place to ensure use of serviced and greased equipment and earmuffs by operators.
Switch off engines when not being used.
Generators to be well insulted or placed in enclosures to minimize noise levels.
Sprinkling of water on graded routes to reduce dust.
Provide earmuffs to workers.
Use of appropriate devices to filter toxic emissions from the smoke before released to the atmosphere.
Screening/fencing the site to avoid spread of dust  and ensuring all noisy work is done during daytime to avoid disturbance to neighbours.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kapiti Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Central Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Thika East and West District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR2066256          National Environment Management Authority.

