
				Page: 1522GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5578
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIROMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED IRARU SMALL HYDROPOWER STATION IN KIUNGONE LOCATION, SOUTH IMENTI IN IMENTI SOUTH DISTRICT
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) regulations, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the implementation of the proposed Iraru Small-hydropower.
The proposed small-hydropower station is expected to supply energy within Kenya Tea Development Agency (KTDA) factories while enabling them to achieve self-reliance.
The proposed Small-Hydropower station is about 15 Kilometres from Nkubu town. It is located at Lower Kiungone Sub-location, Kiungone Location, Abogeta West, South Imenti South District. The proposed Small-Hydropower station is located 4 kilometres from Mt. Kenya forest, 5 kilometres from Kionyo tea factory.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible impacts


Mitigation Measures 


Biological Diversity
(Flora and Fauna)


All trees uprooted to pave way for canal construction should be replanted
Planting of grass and tress species that would be destroyed, flowers and grass within the proposed small-hydropower station site.
Planting of trees, grass and flowers has been done and will continue to be done to improve on the landscape quality of the small-hydropower station site and also acts as windbreakers.
Special attention paid to propagation of the endangered tree species especially Prunus Africana.
Tree species to be planted to rehabilitate the site and improve the aesthetic value of the small hydropower station site.
Promote the development of community nurseries and educate on need of planting trees to mitigate impact of global warming in the region.


Possible impacts


Mitigation Measures 


Land degradation
due to increase soil erosion


Terraces to be constructed at appropriate places at the site and suitable plants and grass species planted.
Extra roads to be constructed as narrow as possible and along the contour in consultation with Kenya forest.
Service (KFS) and Ministry of Roads and Public Works as necessary.
Rip-off compacted for planting of trees.
Footpaths to be protected with appropriate grass species, stores or appropriate environmentally friendly measures that would prevent soil erosion.
Avoid use of heavy machinery.
Use water bowsers to minimize dust pollution
Control earth works.


Siltation
 
 


Ensure de-silting is done regularly.
Divert storm water from canal to reduce siltation.
Construction of recommended silt traps.


Physical
environmental
destruction(land scarification)


Avoid use of heavy machinery.
Use water to minimize dust pollution Control earth works.
Construction of embankment especially around the powerhouse to control soil erosion.
Storm water drainage to be properly managed.
Roads rip-off and revegetation after construction.


Wastes disposal


The proposed small-hydropower station is addressing the problem as follows: A waste management plan will be put in place, waste disposal containers will be placed at strategic places where wastes are sorted out into biodegradable, and non-biodegradable.
Solid wastes such as plastics, papers, and bottles will be collected for recycling.
While papers and other wastes that cannot be recycled are burnt in the compost pit or incinerator.
Wastes such as green leaves will be used to produce compost manure for flower gardens to improve soil fertility and also planting trees and flowers later at the small-hydropower station site.
Waste water to be disposed into water sanitation system and exhausted for disposal as need arises.
Construction of Iko toilets OR flush toilets to be designed and sited.


Environmental
pollution through
oil, petrol and diesel spillage


Minimize accidental spillage of oils, petrol and diesels.


 


Where they occur, immediate collection and treatment of site is recommended.


 


Dispose wastewater using environmentally sounds methods.


 


Dispose machinery pollutants using environmentally sounds methods.


Possible impacts


Mitigation Measures 


 


Ensure machinery and equipment are well serviced to reduce leaks.


Occupational health
hazards or issues
during construction


Provision of adequate personal protective gear/equipment to workers such as gloves and gum boots to workers during construction work.
Use of water to reduce effect of dust on workers and the environment.
Erect warning signs.
Fence where necessary
HIV and AIDS, VCT and Health Support Clinic within the small-hydropower station area.


Personal Safety such as workforce accidents by unsafe working practices


Guard all moving parts of machines; provide personal protective clothing and ensure they are used;
Display for all to read health, safety and environmental management polices
Compliance to the provisions of the EHS management plan to safeguard workers.
Prepare and print safety manual for distribution to workers. Contract an EHS Consultant to police workers with the view to ensure provisions of the EHS regulations are adhere to.
Provide protective gear for example overalls, hard hats (helmets), and safety boots among others.


Air, dust and noise
pollution 


Dust masks to be provided to workers to limit 42 inhalation of the dust.
Contractor will give prior notice of activities and time durations to neighboring households.
Watering dusty ground before excavation begins.
Measures will be put place to ensure use of serviced and greased equipment and earmuffs by operators.
Switch off engines when not being used
Generators to be well insulted or placed in enclosures to minimize noise levels.
Sprinkling of water on graded routes to reduce dust.
Provide earmuffs to workers.
Use of appropriate devices to filter toxic emissions from the smoke before released to the atmosphere.
Screening/fencing the site to avoid spread of dust  and ensuring all noisy work is done during daytime to avoid disturbance to neighbours.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kapiti Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) Provincial Director of Environment, Eastern  Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Meru Central District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR2066256          National Environment Management Authority.

