
				Page: 658Gazette Notice No. 1660
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF A 10” (TEN INCH) 122KM OIL PIPELINE FROM SINENDET (PS-26) TO KISUMU (PS-28) BY CHINA PETROLEUM PIPELINE BUREAU FOR KENYA PIPELINE COMPANY LIMITED TRAVERSING THROUGH 3 COUNTIES NAMELY; NAKURU, KERICHO AND KISUMU
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Pipeline Company Limited) is proposing to a 10” (Ten Inch) 122KM Oil Pipeline from Sinendet (PS-26) to Kisumu (PS-28) traversing through 3 Counties Namely; Nakuru, Kericho and Kisumu.
The proposed 10” (ten inch) pipeline construction covers a distance of 122km and is intended to be tied from PS-26 and flow to PS-28. The general route of the proposed pipeline shall follow that of the existing 6 inch pipeline’s Right of way with a centre displacement of about 5m to the right downstream in most of the sections.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental  and social impacts


Mitigation measures


Physiography and geology


Maintain drainage course flows during excavations.
Ensure trenching/excavations are only done along the proposed pipeline route and where necessary as per the project description.
Ensure backfilling of excavations, reinstatement of disturbed ground and general restoration of site.
Clear all waste from site.
Maintain proper handling of solid and liquid waste throughout the project rollout.


Soils
 
 


Avoid deep excavations in areas sensitive to erosion;
Carry out construction works in the dry season.
Limit the circulation or access of heavy machines to minimal areas.
Avoid clearance or establishment of access roads along steep slopes; instead locate them perpendicular or diagonally to the slope.
Stabilise the soils in order to reduce potential erosion after project construction phase is over.
At the end of construction works, level off the soils and facilitate vegetation regeneration.
Excavations along the right of way should only be undertaken where it must be otherwise the same should be kept to a minimum; In cases where the excavations are undertaken in close proximity to the existing oil pipeline then the following will be taken in considerations.
All excavations in open cut should be the minimum necessary for the construction of the Works.


Terrestrial environment (habitats, flora, and fauna)


Ensure that equipment are in perfect working order and cause minimal, if any, noise/air pollution nuisance to fauna.
Adopt a proper waste management system to avoid attracting scavenging animals and environmental pollution.
There should be very minimal vegetation removal with root-stock being maintained where vegetation will be cleared outside the Right of way and for setting up the base camp.
Excavations and vegetation clearing should only follow the pre-surveyed routes and that only few access routes should be opened up.
Hunting/trapping and fishing of fauna and gathering of edible plants by workers, when on and off duty, should be strictly prohibited. This prohibition should extend to the purchase of these items from the indigenous population by workers.


Surface and Groundwater Resources


Sustainable sourcing of water for contractors site camp.
Waste management should be done according to standards set by legislation and guidelines.


Solid and Liquid Wastes


A waste management plan documenting the waste strategy, storage (including facilities and locations), handling procedures and means of disposal, should be developed and should include a clear waste-tracking mechanism to track waste consignments from the originating location to the final waste treatment and disposal location.
It is recommended that segregation of solid wastes at source is appropriately carried out and consideration given to re-use, recycling, or disposal as appropriate.
Hygienic sanitation and disposal of grey and black water should be covered in the waste management plan in order to protect the general health of the workers and the general public.
Ensure that solid waste is removed from site for recycling/disposal only by a NEMA-authorized waste handler.
Fuel and other liquid storage areas should be collected and handled appropriately.
Servicing of equipment should be carried out in a designated garage area which has regularly maintained oil drainage traps and readily available spill-kits.
Workers be trained and equipped to prevent and/or manage fuel/oil spills.


Air quality


Limit traffic speed and restrict movement of vehicles as to minimize dust generation.
Field vehicles, trucks and any other machinery should be regularly serviced, well maintained, and switched off when not in use.
Use low sulphur fuels.
Employees working in dusty conditions must use appropriate PPE.


Occupational Health and safety


All operations will be conducted in compliance with KPC


