
				Page: 2757GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  8698
THE BIOSAFETY ACT
(No. 2 of 2009)
THE BIOSAFETY (ENVIRONMENTAL RELEASE) REGULATIONS, 2011,
THE NATIONAL BIOSAFETY AUTHORITY
REQUEST FOR COMMENTS ON AN APPLICATION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RELEASE (OPEN FIELD CULTIVATION) AND PLACING ON THE MARKET OF GENETICALLY ENGINEERED COTTON IN KENYA.
The National Biosafety Authority (NBA) was established through the Biosafety Act, No. 2 of 2009 to regulate all activities involving genetically modified organisms (GMOs) by ensuring safety of human and animal health and provision of adequate protection of the environment.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Biosafety Act, No. 2 of 2009, section 19(4) read together with Biosafety (Environmental Release) Regulations, 2011, section 12(1) (2), the National Biosafety Authority (NBA) hereby announces to the public the receipt of an Application for consideration of environmental release (open field cultivation) and placing on the market (including food/feed uses) of genetically modified insect protected (Bt) cotton in Kenya. The Application which follows several years of laboratory, greenhouse, confined field trials and commercial planting was submitted by Monsanto Kenya Ltd.
The contents in the application indicate that Bt cotton expresses Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab2 proteins whose presence provides in-built protection against attack from certain lepidopteran insect pests.  This protection is expected to improve cotton lint quality and increase yields due to reduced insect-pest damage.  In addition farmers will benefit from reduced exposure to insecticides resulting in time and labor savings.  The Application is currently undergoing a science-based review process by the NBA together with relevant regulatory agencies and independent experts to ascertain that the proposed product is safe to human and animal health and to the environment. Key aspects considered in the food safety assessment include (but not limited to): nutritional composition, toxicity and allergenicity, while the environmental evaluation include (but not limited to): persistence and invasiveness, horizontal gene transfer and impact on non-target organisms.  
The Biosafety Act, No. 2 of 2009 provides that the public participates in the decision making-process through submission of comments to the Authority. It is in compliance with this provision that we request the public to participate through sending of comments. The Authority therefore, will make the final decision on the Application based on risk assessments, socio-economic considerations and comments received by the public.
In the event the Authority reaching a decision to grant approval for environmental release and placing on the market (including food and feed uses) of Bt cotton in Kenya, due process governing testing, official release and commercialization of seed and plant varieties in Kenya shall apply as per the national policy, legislation and guidelines for handling genetically modified crops in Kenya.
All interested parties and persons should submit written comments on this Application, to reach the undersigned not later than 30 calendar days from the date of this publication i.e. 19th December, 2015.
More information on the application, guidelines for public participation and the submission form can be accessed through the Authority’s website www.biosafetykenya.go.ke or physically at the NBA offices during normal working hours in the contact address below.
The Chief Executive Officer, National Biosafety Authority, Commission for University Education Complex, Redhill Road, off Limuru Road, P.O. Box 28251–00100, Nairobi, or E-mail: ercotton@biosafetykenya.go.ke
Dated the 20th November, 2015.
WILLY K. TONUI,
Chief Executive Officer, 
 National Biosafety Authority. 

