
				Page: 1225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4560
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS FOR MTWAPA HEIGHTS LIMITED IN MTWAPA ON PLOT NO. MN/III/3464, KILIFI DISTRICT
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed residential development for Mtwapa heights limited in Mtwapa on plot MN/III/3464, Kilifi District.
The proposed project entails putting up:
(a) 90 units of 3 bedroom houses on four storey building in a 1.8 acres.
(b) 66 units of 4 bedroom maisonettes on a 0.0778 acres.
(c)  10 units of 2-bedroomed house and 5 shops.
(d) Club house, swimming pool.
The project is located along Mombasa–Kilifi Highway behind Coca Cola coastal bottlers which is about two kilometres from Mtwapa Town on plot MN/III/3464, Kilifi District, Current site has old building at the core used to be site office for the former four farms limited which will be demolished during project preparations.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures.

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Increased exploitation of raw materials


Source building materials from suppliers who use environmentally friendly processes in their operations.
Ensure accurate budgeting and estimation of actual construction material requirements to ensure that the least amount of material necessary is ordered.
Ensure that damage or loss of materials at the construction site are kept minimal through proper storage.
Use at least 5% to 10% recycled refurbished or salvaged materials to reduce the use of raw materials and divert material from landfills.

 
 
 

Ecosystem disturbance


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area to be affected by construction works.
Specify locations for trailers and equipment, and areas of the site which should be kept free of traffic, equipment, and storage.
Designate access routes and parking within the site.
Preserve of trees and plant more after construction.
Design and implement an appropriate landscaping programme to help in re-vegetation of part of the project area after construction.

 
 
 
 

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Run off and soil erosion


Create storm water management practices, such as piping systems or retention tanks, which can be carried over after the building is complete.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as levelling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.
Ensure that any compacted areas are ripped to reduce run-off.

 
 
 

Solid waste generation


Through accurate estimation of the sizes and quantities of materials required, order materials in the sizes and quantities they will be needed, rather than cutting them to size, or having large quantities of residual materials.
Ensure that construction materials left over at the end of construction will be used in other projects rather than being disposed of.
Ensure that damaged or wasted construction materials including cabinets, doors, plumbing and lighting fixtures, marbles and glass will be recovered for refurbishing and use in other projects.
Donate recyclable/reusable or residual materials to local community groups, institutions and individual local residents or home owners.
Use of durable, long-lasting materials that will not need to be replaced as often, thereby reducing the amount of construction waste generated over time.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure to the elements.
Purchase of perishable construction materials such as paints should be done incrementally to ensure reduced spoilage of unused materials.
Use building materials that have minimal or no packaging to avoid the generation of excessive packaging waste.
Use construction materials containing recycled content when possible and in accordance with accepted standards.
Reuse packaging materials such as cartons, cement bags, empty metal and plastic containers to reduce waste at the site.
Dispose waste more responsibly by dumping at designated dumping sites or landfills only; the use of a registered waste disposal company is encouraged.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Air/ Dust pollution


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes each day to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.

 
 

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Air pollution


Sensitise truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/offloading points and parking areas, 2. switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points.
Ensure proper planning of transportation of materials to ensure that vehicle fills are increased in order to reduce the number of trips done per vehicle or the number of vehicles on the road.

 

Noise Pollution


Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitize construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, residential areas and hospitals.
Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation.
Ensure that all generators and heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.

 
 
 

Depletion of energy resources


Ensure electrical equipment, appliances and lights are switched off when not being used.
Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.
Ensure planning of transportation of materials to ensure that fossil fuels (diesel, petrol) are not consumed in excessive amounts.
Monitor energy use during construction and set targets for reduction of energy use.

 
 
 

Exploitation of water resources


Promptly detect and repair of water pipe and tank leaks.
Ensure taps are not running when not in use.
Install water conserving taps that turn-off automatically when water is not being used.
Promote recycling and reuse of water as much as possible.
Install a discharge meter at water outlets to determine and monitor total water usage.

 
 
 
 

Effluent emissions


Provide means for handling sewage generated by construction workers and premises while in operation.
Conduct regular checks for sewage pipe blockages or damages since such vices can lead to release of the effluent into the land and water bodies.
Monitor effluent quality regularly to ensure that the stipulated discharge rules and standards are not violated.

 
 

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Violation of rules and Regulations.


Ensure that all building plans are approved by the Local Authority and the local Occupational Health and Safety Office.
Registration of the premises under the Occupation health and safety Act 2007.
A general register should be kept within the facility as stipulated in Occupation health and Safety Act 2007

 
 

Mishaps


The abstract of the Occupational Health and Safety must be displayed at prominent places within the site.
Ensure that provisions for reporting incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences during construction using prescribed forms obtainable from the local Occupational Health and Safety Office (OHSO) are in place.
Ensure that the premises are insured as per statutory requirements (third party and workman’s compensation).
Develop, document and display prominently an appropriate SHE policy for construction works.

 
 
 

Injuries caused by machineries and equipments.


 Ensure that machinery, equipment,     personal protective equipment, appliances  and hand tools used in construction do comply with the prescribed safety and health standards and be appropriately installed maintained and safeguarded.
Ensure that equipment and work tasks are adapted to fit workers and their ability including protection against mental strain.
All machines and other moving parts of equipment must be enclosed or guarded to protect all workers from injury.
Arrangements must be in place to train and supervise inexperienced workers regarding construction machinery use and other procedures/operations.
Equipment such as fire extinguishers must be examined by a government authorised person. The equipment may only be used if a certificate of examination has been issued.
Reports of such examinations must be presented in prescribed forms, signed by the examiner and attached to the general register.

 
 
 
 
 

Catastrophes
 


Well stocked first aid box which is easily available and accessible should be provided within the premises.
Provision must be made for persons to be trained in first aid, with a certificate issued by a recognized body.
Fire fighting equipment such as fire extinguishers and hydrant systems should be provided at strategic locations such as stores and construction areas.
Regular inspection and servicing of the equipment must be undertaken by a reputable service provider and records of such inspections maintained.
Signs such as “NO SMOKING” must be prominently displayed within the premises, especially in parts where inflammable materials are stored.

 
 
 
 

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Food and toxins.
 


Develop a suitable system for the safe collection, recycling and disposal of chemical wastes, obsolete chemicals and empty chemical containers to avoid their reuse for other purposes and to eliminate or minimize the risks to safety, health and environment.
Ensure that all chemicals used in construction are appropriately labelled or marked and that material safety data sheets containing essential information regarding their identity, suppliers classification of hazards, safety precautions and emergency procedures are provided and are made available to employees and their representatives.
Keep a record of all hazardous chemicals used at the premises, cross-referenced to the appropriate chemical safety data sheets.
There should be no eating or drinking in areas where chemicals are stored or used.

 
 
 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Coast Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Kilifi District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR19322231        National Environment Management Authority.

