
				Page: 1221GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4229
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED BULK LPG STORAGE AND PACKING FACILITY ON PLOT NO. L.R. NO. 277 RUIRU TOWNSHIP
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed bulk LPG storage and packing facility.
The proposed project involves off loading and loading zones, LPG pump, LPG compressor, water pump, water storage, cooling tower system, roto gauge, vapour line and storage-packed LPG.
The project is situated on plot No. L.R. No. 277 Ruiru Township, 2 kilometers from Ruiru Town, Central Business District along the Ruiru–Kiambu Road. The site is in industrial area.
The following are the anticipated impact and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Regulatory requirements


Comply with Energy Act, 2006. The Energy (Liquefied Petroleum Gas) Regulations, 2009, Scheme of Supervision and Control for Storage and filling of LPG according to KS 1938–4:2005 (Kenyan specifications for the construction, handling, storage and distribution of petroleum products KS 1938 as set out by the Kenya Bureau of Standards (KeBS).


Change in hydrology/impended drainage


Proper installation of drainage structures.


 


Install cascades to break the impact of water flowing in the drains.


 


Ensure efficiency of drainage structures through proper design and maintenance.


 


Provide gratings to the drainage channels.


 


Regular checks on any sludge along drainage channels.


 


Visual checks of oil interceptors and drainage channels of any leaks.


Soil erosion


Control any earthworks.


 


Rehabilitate degraded environment to avaiod siltation and wash offs.


 


Compact loose soils.


 


Landscapping.


 


Ensure management of excavation activities.


 


Control activities especially during rainy conditions.


 


Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures where necessary.


 


Proper disposal of excavated loose soil (black cotton soil).


Air pollution through dust and gaseous emissions


Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase of excavated areas.


 


Regular maintenance of construction plant and equipment,


 


Engage sensitive construction workers.


 


Proper use of PPEs.


Noise pollution


Maintain plant equipment (if present/used).


 


Construction activities to be restricted to daytime.


 


Workers in the vicinity of or involved in high-level noise to wear respective safety and protective gear i.e. earplugs and earmuffs.


 


Appropriate selection of machinery.


Oil pollution


Proper storage, handling and disposal of new oil and used oil and related wastes.


 


Maintain plant and equipment to avoid leaks.


 


Provide oil interceptors along the drains leading from LPG filling area.


Water resources


Management of water usage.


 


Recycling of water at the construction phase where possible.


 


Use of water conservation signs at the wash rooms and install water conserving taps.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Public health and occupational safety


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.


 


Ensure effective wastewater management.


 


Design of sewerage system should be as provided in the plans.


 


Provide First Aid kits on the site.


 


Sensitize residents/workers on environmental management.


 


Ensure there is no ponding to eliminate breading of mosquitoes during construction.


 


Workers should be trained on occupational health and safety and First Aid administration.


 


Train staff on LPG handling.


Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


 


Sensitize workers on HIV and AIDS


Vegatation


Landscaping and planting all disturbed areas.


 


Planting flowers/grassing should be done just before the rains or irrigated on dry spells.


Fire safety training/emergency response procedures (ERPs)


To enhance health and safety preparedness among stakeholders.
Ensure equipment is in good working condition.


 


Put up emergency response contacts.


 


Put up ERP notification instructions.


 


Put up simple instructions on how to handle fires, product spills, LPG incidents, armed robbery and product contaminations.


Fire outbreaks


Install fire-fighting equipment as provided by RMC fire department.


 


Sensitize the residents on fire risks i.e. conduct regular fire drills.


 


Adapt effective emergency response plans.


 


Provide emergency numbers at strategic points.


Water quality/waste management


Follow NEMA regulations. Ensure registration of contracted garbage handlers with NEMA for compliance with prevailing regulations.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Minis try of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Central Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Thika East/West Districts.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1681973          National Environment Management Authority.

