
				Page: 1216
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4556
THE WATER ACT
(NO. 8 OF 2002)
WATER SERVICES REGULATORY BOARD
STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION
THE public is notified that under powers granted to Water Services Regulatory Board (WASREB) sections 61 and 62 of the Water Act 2002, WASREB has decided to review and amend the licenses of the following water service boards:
Lake Victoria South Water Services Board
Lake Victoria North Water Services Board
Coast Water Services Board
Northern Water Services Board
Tana Water Services Board
These licenses were issued in 2007 and certain terms and conditions need to be updated with a view to making the license conditions responsive to the needs and requirements of the consumers and potential consumers of water services for efficient and sustainable delivery of water services in the following areas:
(a) Provision of potable water in an incremental manner.
(b) Provision of waste water disposal systems in an incremental manner.
(c)  Registration of all independent water operators in the country and regulation of the same.
(d) Embedding key relevant skills in the licensee.
(e)  Ensuring improvement in governance of water systems and operations.
(f)   Sourcing of funds through public private partnerships for building of water service infrastructure.
(g) Mapping of water service networks and facilities in digital format.
(h) Timely resolution of complaints and reporting on the resolutions.
(i)   Prioritisation of infrastructure projects and review of the same by Wasreb.
(j)   Public reporting of achievement by licensees in water service delivery.
(k)  Emergency planning by the licensees.
Details of the proposed amendments can be perused by any member of the public at the offices of WASREB on 5th floor NHIF building Wing A. The public is free to offer written comments on the said proposed amendments.
Members of the public may also down load the proposed amendments on our website www.wasreb.go.ke  from the 18th of April 2011 and submit written comments on the same.
Comments shall not be accepted after the 18th of May 2011.
ROBERT GAKUBIA,
Chief Executive Officer.


