
				Page: 3172GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8488
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
DRAFT STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR MASTER PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF MOMBASA SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 42 and 43 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations of 2003, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received a Draft Strategic Environmental Assessment Report for the Mombasa Special Economic Zone Development Master Plan. The SEA findings are also expected to integrate the existing sectoral plans and programs to establish sustainable economic zone development mechanisms.
The Ministry of Industrialization and Enterprise Development (MOIED) is the proponent of the Master Plan for the Mombasa Special Economic Zone (SEZ). It is one of the Kenya Vision 2030 flagship projects aimed at transforming the country into a newly industrialized middle income economy providing high quality life for all citizens by the year 2030.
The Master Plan for Mombasa SEZ targets about 3000 acres property owned by the Kenya Ports Authority (KPS) and situated in the Dongo Kundu area of Mombasa County. The site can be accessed from the Mombasa – Lunga Lunga Road, turning off at the Mtongwe Corner and the proceeding up to the Corner Mbaya , then proceed by dirt road all the way to the Mbuta Medical Centre which marks the eastern limit of the Master Plan area. The Norther and the Western boundary of Dongo Kundu id defined by the Port Reitz and Bombo Creek shorelines.
The land use plan for Mombasa SEZ at Dongo Kundu has taken into account the following:
(a) The status of Mombasa Port;
(b) Promotion of prospective manufacturing industry in Kenya;
(c)  Introduction of multi-functional land use;
(d) Cost competitiveness by minimizing the earth work volume for land reclamation;
(e)  Resettlement of informal settlers and conservation of kayas; and
(f)   Necessary infrastructure utility and facility.
The proposed Mombasa SEZ will introduce the following functions:
Port.
Free port.
Free trade zone.
Industrial park.
MICE area.
Tourism parks.
Service area.
Natural gas power plant.
Transmission line.
Enterprise areas.
Residential area.
Community resettlement.
Mombasa southern bypass road.
Zone connection road.
Utility area
 
The primary goal of Mombasa SEZ Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) is to provide a high level of protection to the environment by integrating environmental considerations at the earliest stage in the plan-making process with a view to promoting sustainable development and informing the draft development plan of any significant environmental impacts.
The specific objectives for this SEA Study are:
(a) To identify environmental and social priorities and key linkages between environmental protection and trade growth in areas influenced by SEZ;
(b) To assess likely significant effects of SEZ development on these environmental and social priorities and key linkages;
(c)  To formulate a set of measures to address these priority concerns and to take advantage of opportunities that will emerge from SEZ development, considering institutional and financial conditions needed for implementing such proposal; and
(d) To recommend mechanisms that will enable future adjustments to maintain and promote sustainable and equitable economic/trade growth in response to phased and gradual development of SEZ.
(e)  The key potential negative impacts and the recommended mitigation measures for Mombasa SEZ Master Plan development and implementation are highlighted below:

Category 


Potential impact


Recommendations


Natural environment


Site disturbances from survey and related activities.
Optimization of survey methods.
Slope destabilisation in the Port Reitz area.
Soil stabilisation measures.
Sediment generation into port Reitz from construction works.
Physical detention of sediments
Minimization of soil generation from construction and site setting.
Hydrological changes of surface/ground water due to earthworks.
Earthworks in dry season.
Securement of water channel and restoration pond for storm water.
Surplus soil generated from construction/ exploitation of soil/sand for landfill works.
Equation of cut earth volume and filling volume.
Interference with ecological systems and biodiversity in mangrove and tidal flat areas.
Enhancement of compensatory conservation in Mangrove Reforestation Plan
Destruction of biodiversity held in sacred groves and undisturbed bush lands.
Preservation of highly prioritised reservoir of biodiversity.
Reforestation.
Introduction of invasive/alien species in construction materials.
Screening of original sites of materials.
Alterations of the physical landscape.
Identification and preservation of aesthetic areas.
Create buffer zone.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Pollution control


Nuisances - dust, air, water pollution, noise and vibrations and odour from construction work and increased traffic.
Adherence to OSHA, 2007
Optimisation of construction device method, schedule and transportation route etc. to minimise the effects to the sensitive receptors.
Control traffic routes
Avoid or minimise project transportation through community areas.
Adoption of cleaner production systems.
Installation of exhaust gas treatment faciities.
Pollution from construction and operational  wastes, waste oil and spares
Development of Waste Management Plan.
Reduction and recycling of wastes.
Proper management of all types of wastes.
Adoption of cleaner production systems.
Displacement of people and property to create SEZ, disturbance to livelihood, village life and access to existing infrastructure.
Development of comprehensive RAP for Dongo Kundu including. the Livelihood Restoration Plan.
Reforestation of Mangrove.
Pressure on water resources and other natural resources.

 
 
 
 
 

 


Liaise with CWSB
Coordination with other master plans for the city development and resources provision.
Reforestation of Mangrove.
Adoption of cleaner production systems.
Generation of effluent water and sewerage.
Install adequate waste water treatment facilities.
To be site specific during EIA/IEE.
Potential for marine disasters.
Establish monitoring systems for environmental accidents.
Increase in emission of Green house gases.
Conservation of energy at SEZ
Management of transportation systems.

 
 
 
 
 
 

Social environment


Minor accidents during survey works.
Safety communication and training.
Safety measures e.g. PPEs.
Public anxiety and concerns over changes in livelihood and resettlement.
Information disclosure and public consultation of project-related plan.
Social impacts of construction crew and labour camps.
Local sourcing of labour.
OSH concerns.
Adopt fire prevention strategy.
Proper management of working conditions.
Occupational health and safety training.
Provision of PPEs.
Compliance and enforcement of OSHA, 2007.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Others


Disconnect with the other planned developments eg. Water supply project financed by World Bank.
Coordination with related projects supervised by County Government and other stakeholders
Information sharing and frequent consultation among the related agencies and projects
Interference with the flight path to Mombasa Moi International Airport and other existing facilities around SEZ.
Coordination with the other existing facilities functions.
Impacts on Kaya forests and local marine heritage e.g. wrecks at Port Reitz.
Reconnaissance survey and preservation of spiritual and historical sites
Preservation of accessibility to these sites.

 
 
 
 
 
The full draft strategic environmental assessment for the Mombasa SEZ Development Master Plan is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Industrialization and Enterprise Development (MOIED), Social Security House, P.O. Box 30547–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process regarding this SEA Comments can be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/6110376         National Environment Management Authority.

