
				Page: 1794GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2833
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF MEDIUM INCOME APARTMENTS AS COMPONENT OF THE PROPOSED MIXED URBAN DEVELOPMENT AT CLAY WORKS ON L.R. NO 57/2055-KASARANI (NAIROBI CITY COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Agricultural and Industrial Holdings Ltd., is proposing to construct a medium income residential apartment block comprising 560 units on 14 blocks. The proposed project site is located along the Thika Super Highway 15 kilometers from Nairobi city centre on L.R. No. 57/2055, Kasarani
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
 

Environmental issue


Recommended mitigation measures


Minimize extraction site impacts and demand for raw materials in construction
 


Source construction materials are extracted from registered firms whose facilities have undergone satisfactory environmental impact assessment/audit and received NEMA approval.
Source construction materials from local suppliers who use environmentally friendly processes in their operations.
Ensure accurate budgeting and estimation of actual construction material requirements to ensure that the least amount of material necessary is ordered.
Ensure that damage or loss of materials at the construction site is kept minimal through proper storage.
Consider reuse of construction materials and use of recycled materials.


Minimization of local increase in construction traffic


Construction vehicles should enter and leave the site at appropriate times.
Using signs and barriers the Contractor will direct vehicles and pedestrian traffic as needed around the construction site.
Some activities may be scheduled in off-peak traffic times to minimize impacts.


Increased solid waste generation and efficient solid waste management during construction
 


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: ie, Source reduction; Recycling; Reuse; and Land filling.
Order materials in the sizes and quantities they will be
needed,  rather  than  cutting  them  to  size,  or  having large quantities of residual materials.
Damaged/ wasted  construction  materials  to  be recovered for refurbishing and use in other projects.
Use of durable, long-lasting materials to reduce the amount of construction waste generated over time.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials.
Use construction materials that require minimal or no packaging.
Use  construction  materials  containing  recycled content where  possible  and  in  accordance  with accepted standards.
Reuse packaging materials such as cartons, cement bags, empty metal and plastic containers.
Dispose waste more responsibly by dumping at designated dumping sites or landfills only.
Waste collection bins to be provided at designated points on site.


Dust emission
 


Downwash of trucks (especially tyres) prior to departure from site.
Cover stockpiles of sand, soil  and  similar  materials or surround them with wind breaks.
Cover trucks hauling dirt and debris to reduce spillage on to paved roads surface or have adequate free board to prevent spillage.
Post  signs  that  limit vehicles  speed  onto  unpaved roads and  over  disturbed  soils.  Rapid  onsite
construction  so  as  to  reduce  duration  of  traffic interference and  therefore  reduce  emissions  from traffic delays.
Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal protective equipment to be worn.


Noise and vibration
 


Install portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationery equipment where necessary.
Prescribe  noise  reduction  measures  if  appropriate e.g. restricted  working  hours,  transport  hours  and noise buffering
Consult with the surrounding community on the permissible noise levels and best working hours.
Use quiet equipment (i.e. equipment designed with noise control elements).
Co-ordinate with relevant agencies regarding all construction activities in the project area.
Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitize  construction  drivers  to  avoid  gunning  of vehicle  engines  or  hooting  especially  when  passing throughsensitive  areas  such  as  churches,  offices, hospitals, residential houses and schools.
Ensure that construction machinery is kept in good condition to reduce noise generation. The noisy construction works will be planned to be during the day.


Increased energy consumption
 


Ensure electrical equipment and appliances are switched off when not being used.
 Install energy saving fluorescent tubes and bulbs at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.
Ensure  planning  of  transportation  of  materials  to ensurethat  fossil  fuels  (diesel,  petrol)  are  not consumed in excessive amounts.
Development of energy management plan.
Monitor energy use during construction and set targets for reduction of energy use.


Increased water demand
 


Promptly detect and repair of water pipe and tank leaks.
Sensitize construction workers to conserve water.
Install a discharge meter to determine and monitor total water usage.
Promote recycling and reuse of water as much as possible.
Install water conserving taps.


Increased storm water run-off
 


Surface runoff and roof water shall be harvested and stored for reuse.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of  the  project  site  to reduce  run-off  velocity  and increase infiltration of storm water.
Design  a  storm  water  management  plan  that minimizes  impervious  area  infiltration  by  use  of recharge  areas  and  use  of  detention  and/or retention with graduated outlet control structure


Oil spills
 


A designated garage section of the site fitted with oil trapping equipments to be planned for changes.
Prompt cleaning of oil and fuel spills.
Proper disposal of clothing or rags contaminated with oil.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8858211         National Environment Management Authority.

