
				Page: 1796GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2834
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF TWENTY SEVEN (27)  FLOORS CENTRAL BANK OF KENYA PENSION TOWER   ON L.R. NO. 209/4976 AND 4977  NAIROBI CITY CENTRE, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, CBK Pension Fund is proposing to construct its Pension tower of twenty seven floors (27) on plot L.R 209/4976 and 4977 within Nairobi city. The components of the project includes: Basement 01 carrying 48 parking spaces; basement 02 carrying 35 parking spaces; ground floor contains main entrance, commercial spaces 1–5, Transformer room, switch room, plant room; 1st – 4th floor contains parking spaces each floor carrying 49 parking spaces; 5th floor has a restaurant and auditorium; 6th–25th office spaces and 26th –27th  a pent house and office space.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Proposed Mitigation Measure


Reduce traffic congestion and possible accidents


Traffic congestion and accidents


Minimize the haulage and transportation of construction of materials during peak hours using public roads.
Adopt a Traffic Management Plan to enhance the traffic movement within the site and the public road.
Employ traffic marshals to control the movement of vehicles during the construction phase of the project.
Use of signs for diversion and to warn motorists against dangers at or near construction site.
Use of reflective jackets among other PPEs to avoid accidents.


Reduce storm-water, runoff and soil erosion


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


A storm water management plan that minimizes impervious area infiltration by use of recharge areas and use of detention and/or retention with graduated outlet control structure will be designed.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.
Ensure that any compacted areas are ripped to reduce run-off.
Open drains, all interconnected will be provided on site.


Minimize solid waste generation and ensure efficient solid waste management during construction


Increased solid waste generation


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: 1. Source reduction 2. Recycling 3.Composting and reuse 4. Combustion 5. Sanitary land filling.
Ensure that construction materials left over at the end of construction will be used in other projects rather than being disposed off.
Donate recyclable/reusable or residual materials to local community groups, institutions and individual local residents or homeowners.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure to the elements.
Waste collection bins to be provided at designated points on the site.
Private waste disposal company to be contracted to transport and dispose the solid waste from site.


Reduce dust emissions


Dust emission


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations/ Installation of dust nets.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal Protective equipment to be worn always when at work place.


Minimization of exhaust emissions


Exhaust emission


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized Throughout construction period.
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Sensitize truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/offloading points and parking areas, and to switch off vehicle engines at these points.


Minimization of noise and vibration


Noise and vibration


Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Ensure that construction machinery is kept in good condition to reduce noise generation.
The noisy construction works will entirely be planned to be during daytime when most of the neighbours will be at work.
Comply with the provisions of Noise Prevention and Control Rules 2005, Legal notice no. 24 regarding noise limits at the workplace.


To minimize water consumption and ensure more efficient and safe water use


 
High water demand
 


Install water conserving taps that turn-off automatically when water is not being used.
Promote recycling and reuse of water as much as possible.
Promptly detect and repair water pipe and tank leaks.
Sensitize staff to conserve water by avoiding unnecessary water use.


Minimize release of liquid effluent


 
Liquid effluent


Ensure that liquid effluent generated by construction workers is directed to the existing sewerage treatment plant.
Monitor effluent quality regularly to ensure that the stipulated discharge rules and standards are not violated.


Minimize occupational health and safety risks


Occupational health and safety


Adherence to the provisions of the occupational Safety and Health Act 2007.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8858211         National Environment Management Authority.

