
				Page: 1760GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2700
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON IMPLEMENTATION ON CITIZEN PARTICIPATION IN SECURITY IN KENYA
1.  IT IS notified for the information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary for Interior and Co-ordination of National Government has established a Committee to be known as the Committee on Implementation of Citizen Participation in Security in Kenya, (hereinafter referred to as “the Committee”), comprising of the following:
Joseph Kaguthi—(Chairperson)
Members:
Francis Charles Mugambi (Lt. Col. (Rtd);
Nuria Abdullahi (Ms.);
Salim Ndemo (Dr.);
Francis K. Sang (Dr.);
Purity sein karariet (Ms.);
Rama Ndegwa Mwangombe (Maj. (Rtd.);
Nkodila ole Lankas;
Caren Wakoli (Ms.);
Zippy Nzisa Musyimi (Ms.);
Ibrahim Duale (Mr.);
Nancy Wambui Gachoka (Ms.);
Immanuel Ichor Imana,
2.  Terms of reference of the Committee are to:
(a) develop a forum that promote citizens’ participation in security matters and  facilitate  local community leadership structures including, but not limited to, grass root religious and private and public community based institutions to engage on security matters;
(b) support  the transformative paradigm shift of National Police Service and other Government policing Services toward people centered services;
(c)  recommend an appropriate legal framework that will entrench the citizen participation in security matters build on a thorough review of the existing policy, legal and institutional instruments;
(d) review and recommend Information Communication Technology (ICT) usage framework to reduce transaction costs of citizens’ participation in security matters.  Such framework must include media channels like social media among others  and establish a Geographical Information System (GIS) based citizens data bank; and
(e)  recommend any other measures to be taken to strengthen citizen participation in security as a strategy with a view to enhancing long term national security in Kenya.
3.  The Committee shall be the successor in title to the Taskforce established under GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 14485 of 8th November 2013.
4.  The Committee shall remain in office for a period of three (3) years or for such longer period as the Cabinet Secretary may, by notice in the Gazette, prescribe.
5.  This notice shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7th November, 2015.
6.  GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 9272 of 18th December, 2015 is revoked.
JOSEPH NKAISSERRY,
Cabinet Secretary for Interior
and Co-ordination of National Government.

