
				Page: 2164GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5712
TASKFORCE ON SENTENCING
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Chief Justice has appointed a sentencing taskforce consisting of the following—
Justice Mbogholi Msagha—Judiciary—(Chairperson).
Sarah Kinyanjui (Dr.)—UoN, Mombasa Campus—(Vice Chairperson).
Members: 
Deputy Chief Justice, Lady Justice Kalpana Rawal—Judiciary.
Patrick Kiage—Judiciary.
Lady Justice Jessie Lessiit—Judiciary.
Justice Fred Ochieng—Judiciary
Justice Joel Ngugi—Judiciary Training Institute.
Charles Mbogo—Judiciary.
Tripsisa Wamae—Judiciary.
Njeri Thuku—Judiciary Training Institute.
Abdul Omar—Office of the Chief Justice.
Fred Musyimi—Probation and After Care Services.
Vincent Monda—Office of the Director of Public Prosecution.
Robert Kaei—Kenya Prison Service.
Samuel Nyabengi—National Police Service.
Katra Sambili—National Council on the Administration of Justice.
Janet Munywoki—Legal Resources Foundation.
Felix Kyalo—International Development Law Organization.
Jeptum Bargoria—United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Christine Ochieng—Federation of Women Lawyers in Kenya .
Timothy Bryant—Christian Legal Education Aid and Research.
Ian Maina—Law Society of Kenya.
Vincent Chahale—Commission on the Administration of Justice.
Secretariat:
The Judiciary Training Institute shall provide secretariat services for the task force.
Terms of Reference:
1.  The terms of reference of the taskforce are to—
(a) Review past sentencing patterns, policies and outcomes.
(b) Report on how to reduce unwarranted disparity, increase certainty and uniformity; and promote proportionality in sentencing.
(c)  Create a roll out plan for suggested interventions; including educating and engaging members of the public and other stakeholders on the sentencing system and its effectiveness.
2.  In the performance of its functions, the Taskforce—
(a) shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the taskforce shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice, consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions;
(b) may use official reports of any previous studies, policies and legislation relevant to its mandate;
(c)  shall conduct public hearings and open forums and receive views from members of the public and receive oral and written submissions from any person with relevant information; and
(d) may carry out or cause to be carried out such studies or researches as may inform the taskforce on its mandate.
The taskforce shall regulate its own processes and procedure.
The taskforce shall prepare and submit to the Chief Justice, its work plan and progress report within three months of its appointment.
Gazette Notice 4087 of 16th June, 2014 is hereby revoked and replaced accordingly.
Dated the 14th August, 2014.
WILLY MUTUNGA,
Chief Justice and President, Supreme Court of Kenya.

