
				Page: 2219GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5822
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) PLANT AND OIL DEPOT IN EMBAKASI AREA, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (East Africa Spectre Limited) is proposing to develop an LPG filling plant, white oil depot and offices in Embakasi, Nairobi County.
 The development will include five (5) LPG bullets of 100 tons each, three (3) oil tanks (AGO-10 Million litres, PMS-10 Million litres, IK-5 Million litres), White oil Loading gantry complete with loading arms, pumps, LPG road tanker offloading point, three manual cylinder filling points, LPG cylinders offloading zone, a segregated drainage system for the management of storm water and potentially, contaminated waste water, Firefighting facilities and approved pipe and pumping systems.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Changes in Hydrology/ impended drainage


Proper Installation of drainage structures.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures trough proper design and maintenance.
Provide gratings to the drainage channels.
Regular checks on any sludge along drainage channels.
Visual checks of oil interceptor and drainage channels for any leakage.


Soil Erosion


Control any earthworks.
Rehabilitate degraded environment to avoid siltation and wash offs.
Compact loose soils.
Landscaping.
Ensure management of excavation activities.
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures where necessary.
Proper disposal of excavated soil.


Air pollution


Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase of excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Engage sensitive construction workers.
Proper use of PPE.


Noise pollution


Maintain plant equipment.
Construction activities to be restricted to daytime.
Workers in the vicinity of or involved in high-level noise to wear respective safety & protective gear i.e. earplugs & earmuffs.
Appropriate selection of machinery.


Oil Spills


Proper storage, handling and disposal of new oil and used oil and related wastes.
Maintain plant and equipment to avoid leaks
Provide oil interceptors along the drains leading from AGO,PMS and IK loading area.


Water resource


Management of water usage.
Recycling of water at the construction phase where possible.
Use of water conservation signs at the wash rooms and install water conserving taps.


Contractors lay down area


Special attention should be paid to the sanitary facilities on site especially disposal of human waste.
Garbage should be disposed off in accordance with county government requirements.


Road Safety


Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles especially along road links leading to the site.
Provide bill boards at the site/entrance to notify motorists about the development.


Occupational Health and Safety
 


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure effective wastewater management.
Proper design of sewerage system.
Provide First Aid kits on the site.
Sensitize residents/workers on environmental management.
Ensure there is no ponding to eliminate breading of mosquitoes during construction.
Workers should be trained on occupational health and safety and first Aid administration.
Train staff on petroleum product handling.
Sensitize workers on HIV and AIDS.


Vegetation


Landscaping and planting all unpaved areas
Planting flowers / grassing should be done just before the rains or irrigated on dry spells.


Fire safety Training/
Emergency Response
Procedures (ERPs)
 


To enhance health and safety preparedness among stakeholders.
Ensure equipment is in good working condition.
Put up emergency response contacts.
Put up ERP notification instructions.
Put up simple instructions on how to handle fires, product spills, LPG incidents, armed robbery and product contaminations.


Record Keeping
 


Collection and analysis of relevant environmental data at the site.
Data of maintenance of firefighting equipment.
Daily product reconciliation (stock loss control).
Staff Training records.
Incidents and accidents registers.
Weekly inspection records of oil water interceptor and drainage systems.


Internal Audits
 


Monitoring will involve measurements, observations, evaluations, assessment of changes in water quality, waste management, Noise levels, contractor safety etc.


Fire Outbreak


Install fire-fighting equipment as provided by OSH Act.
Sensitize the residents on fire risks i.e. conduct regular fire drills
Adapt effective emergency response plans
Provide emergency numbers at strategic points.


Water Quality/Waste
Management


Follow NEMA regulations. Ensure registration of contracted garbage handlers with NEMA for compliance with the prevailing regulations


Security


Provide security guards and facilities during construction period.
Security guards should always be available to alleviate cases of robbery.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692419         National Environment Management Authority.

