
				Page: 2214GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5688
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT L.R NO. 2951/434 IN KITISURU NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Shiloah Investments Limited) is proposing to put up a commercial and Recreational Development on L.R. No.2951/434,  Ngecha Road in Kitisuru, Nairobi City, Nairobi County.
The development on a 3.6 acres plot is proposed to include Retail Shopping Units, Banks, Food & Beverage Outlets, Office Space, Automotive Retail Unit, Children Recreation Area, Healthcare Facilities and Conferencing Facilities
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Vegetation/biodiversity  disturbance


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area to be affected by construction works.
Specify locations for trailers and equipment, and areas of the site which should be kept free of traffic, equipment, and storage.
Designate access routes and parking within the site.
Introduction of vegetation (trees, shrubs and grass) on open spaces and their maintenance.
Design and implement an appropriate landscaping programme to help in re-vegetation of part of the project area after construction.


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


Storm water to be harvested and recycled for utilization within the project site. Disposal of storm water that will not be harvested will be via surface drain off.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.
Ensure that any compacted areas are ripped to reduce run-off.
Open drains all interconnected will be provided on site.


Solid waste generation
 


Provide solid waste handling facilities such as waste bins and skips.
Apply an Integrated Solid Waste Management approach (reduce, recycle, combustion and sanitary land filling).
All refuse generated should be properly transported and disposed at designated areas.


Dust emission


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal Protective equipment to be worn.


Exhaust emission


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Sensitise truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/offloading points and parking areas, and to switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points.


Noise and vibration


Sensitise construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitise construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, residential areas and hospitals.
Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation.
Ensure that all generators and heavy-duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.
The noisy construction works will entirely be planned to be during daytime when most of the neighbours will be at work.
Comply with the provisions of Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009 regarding noise limits at the workplace.


Increased energy consumption


Ensure electrical equipment, appliances and lights are switched off when not being used.
Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.
Ensure planning of transportation of materials to ensure that fossil fuels (diesel, petrol) are not consumed in excessive amounts.
Monitor energy use during construction and set targets for reduction of energy use.


High water demand


Install water conserving taps that turn-off automatically when water is not being used.
Promote recycling and reuse of water as much as possible.
Install a discharge meter at water outlets to determine and monitor total water usage.
Promptly detect and repair of water pipe and tank leaks.
Sensitise staff to conserve water by avoiding unnecessary water use.
Ensure taps are not running when not in use.


Generation of wastewater


Provide means for handling sewage generated by construction workers.
Conduct regular checks for pipe blockages or damages since such vices can lead to release of the effluent into the land and water bodies.
Monitor effluent quality regularly to ensure that the stipulated discharge rules and standards are not violated.


Incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences.


Ensure that provisions for reporting incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences during construction using prescribed forms obtainable from the local Occupational Health and Safety Office (OHSO) are in place.
Enforcing adherence to safety procedures and preparing contingency plan for accident response in addition safety education and training shall be emphasized.

 

Insecurity


Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the construction site.
Body-search the workers on entry, to avoid getting weapons on site, and leaving site to ensure nothing is stolen.
Ensure only authorized personnel get to the site.
Security alarms will be installed.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692136           National Environment Management Authority

