
				Page: 2216GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5690
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL STATION ON PLOT L.R NO 209/14652, PUMWANI DIVISION, KAMUKUNJI CONSTITUENCY NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Abdi Abdirahman Mohamed) is proposing to develop a petrol station on Plot L.R No .209/1452, Pumwani Division, Kamukunji Constituency Nairobi County.
The development will comprise of three underground petroleum products storage tanks. One of  50,000lts and other two of 70,000lts capacity , tyre centre, puncture repair, car wash, parking space for trucks and lorries, car service, Quick shop/ Mini supermarket, sanitary facilities and associated facilities.
The following are the anticipated impact and proposed mitigation measures.

Impact


Mitigation measures


Noise  Pollution


Ensure that all generators and  heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosure to minimize ambient noise levels.
Drivers to be  sensitized to avoid unnecessary gunning of vehicle engines or hooting
Proper and regular servicing of engines and other machines shall be adhered to.


Aesthetic values


Take all solid waste materials to designated disposal sites.
The landscaping programme should be maintained.


Air/ Dust Pollution


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limited regulations.
Where possible . avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to be worn.


Storm-Water


Open drains connected to NCC storm water drains should be well functioning at all times.
Such drains should also be fitted with oil filters.


 


 


 


Construction/provision of water storage tanks to collect storm water for cleaning uses.
Implementing of roof water harvesting


Security


Ensure the general safety and security all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the facility.


Health and safety


All workers must be provided with the necessary PPE
Ensure all workers are in protective gears all the time when on site.
Place fire extinguisher in strategic areas within the deport.Designate and mark smoking areas.
Workers should be trained as fire marshals
Fire escape routes to be shown clearly.
Provide enough first aid kits within the facility and have at least workers trained in first aid administering.
Emergency telephone number should be well displayed.

 

Spills


Take steps to prevent leaks and spills.Keep machinery, equipment, containers and tanks in good working condition and be careful when transferring used oil.Have sorbent materials available on site.
If a spill or leak occurs,stop the spill from flowing at the source.If a leak from a container or tank cant be stopped,put the product in another holding container or tank.
Contain spilled products.For example,containment can be accomplished by erecting sorbent berms or by spreading a sorbent over the spill.Develop a spill response action plan;Remove,repair or replace the defective tank or container immediately.
All grounds should cemented to prevent spills from leaking into underground water.
Do not discharge petroleum products to sewers,drainage ditches,septic tanks or streams.
Do not dispose of petroleum products  in  landfills or mix them with wastes thatwill  be disposed of in  landfills .Do not mix petroleum products with cleaning solvents .The resulting mixture  can be harzadous waste
Do not use petroleum  productsfor road oiling ,dust control ,weed  control, or for  similar purposes.
Keep storage containers closed when not actively adding or removing materials .When storing drums keep an aisle space between drums to allow for inspection for leaks and damage.
Install secondary containment to prevent the release of petroleum products to the environment-Inspect  the containers and secondary containment structure on a weekly basis to be certain that they are in good condition.Keep written records of these inspections
Cement all ground in the deport   to avoid leakage of petroleum products into underground water or contamination of soil.
Have good plans of emergency cases of spill.
Train all staff on hazard recognition,response plan implementation safety and clean up procedures ,and reporting,.


Fire protection


Signs such as NO SMOKING must be prominently displayed within the premises,especially in parts where inflammable materials are stored.
Fire fighting equipment should be provided at strategic locations such as stores and construction areas.


 


Regular inspection and servicing of the equipment must be undertaken by a reputable service provider and records of such inspections maintained.


Exhaust Emission


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where  leasable equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Sensitize truck drivers to  avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/ offloading points and parking areas, and to switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692315         National Environment Management Authority.

