
				Page: 2182GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5813

THE COMMISSION FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
QUARTERLY REPORT FOR OCTOBER–DECEMBER 2013
 
MISSION AND VISION OF THE COMMISSION
VISION
A UNITED AND PROSPEROUS KENYA IN WHICH EVERYONE RESPECTS, UPHOLDS AND DEFENDS THE CONSTITUTION.
MISSION
To ensure that policies, laws, structures, systems and administrative procedures developed and applied at all levels are consistent and in accord with the letter and spirit of the Constitution of Kenya.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AG                           Attorney General
CIC                          Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution
CIOC                       Committee on the Implementation of the Constitution
CJPC                        Catholic Justice and Peace Commission
CRA                         Commission for Revenue Allocation
EACC                      Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission
ICPAK                     Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya
IEBC                        Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission
KEPSA                    Kenya Private Sector Alliance
KLRC                      Kenya Law Reform Commission
K-NICE                   Kenya National Integrated Civic Education
MCA                        Members of County Assembly
MDA                       Ministries, Departments and Agencies
NCCK                      National Council of Churches of Kenya
NIS                          National Intelligent Service
NLC                         National Land Commission
PFM                         Public Finance Management
SRC                         Salaries and Remuneration Commission
SUPKEM                 Supreme Council of Kenya Muslims
TA                           Transition Authority
FORWARD
This report presents an analysis of the progress realised in the implementation of the Constitution during the period October to December, 2013 pursuant to the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution mandate. During this formative period of transition to a devolved system of Government, the key concern of the Commission has been to ensure that the sovereignty of the people of Kenya is protected and the rule of law and constitutionalism prevails at all times. It has been our trite principle that constitutionalism cannot be sacrificed on account of political or administrative expediency.
CIC facilitated the development of legislation for tabling in Parliament, while ensuring that the laws complied with the Constitution and reflected the will of the people of Kenya. However, it is emerging that the real threat to the implementation of the Constitution emerges from the legislature. Bills that claw back on the Constitution are tabled in Parliament. One such Bill is the County Governments (Amendment) (No.2) Bill published on 16th August, 2013 proposing to amend the County Governments Act, 2012 by inserting a new section to provide for the establishment of County Development Boards, comprising all elected persons and leaders in county government, in each county to approve development plans before implementation by the county executive. In giving Members of Parliament the coordination and implementation roles in County Governments, the Bill muddles the separation of executive and legislative powers. If passed, it would violate the principle on separation of powers.
Another affront to devolution was the move by the National Assembly to pass the Division of Revenue Bill without involving the senate in flagrant breach of the Court. The Supreme Court issued an advisory opinion and stated that the Division of Revenue Bill, 2013 touched on county Governments thus required the Senate’s contribution and the Speaker of the National Assembly was wrong to disregard the Senate’s input. The emerging tussles on role sharing and differentiation call for a deeper understanding of each institutions role and respect for separation of powers and functions.
CIC also continued to engage various stakeholders to ensure the effective implementation of the Constitution. In particular, due to the crisis in the health sector occasioned by industrial action by health workers, CIC held a series of meetings with ministry of Health, health sector practitioners and the President. Among the key issues discussed included devolution of functions, restructuring of the ministry, unbundling of health functions, health care financing and human resource matters.
 
I urge all our stakeholders to read this report taking time to reflect on how to build on the progress realised, as well as take decisive action based on the challenges and recommendations presented in order to move the implementation agenda forward. Once more, I wish to express my gratitude to the people of Kenya, our development partners for material and technical support throughout the implementation journey, and the CIC team for continued service to the people.
 
CHARLES NYACHAE,
Chairperson
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Sections 5(6)(c) and 15(2)(d) of Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of Kenya 2010 and Section 4(a) of the Constitution for the Implementation of the Constitution (CIC) Act, 2010 require CIC to submit to the People of Kenya, Parliament and the President quarterly reports on:
(i)       the progress in the implementation of the Constitution; and  

						
				Page: 2208GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5814
THE RECORDS DISPOSAL (COURTS) RULES
(CAP. 14, SUB. LEG.)
IN THE SENIOR PRINCIPAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
AT KERUGOYA
INTENDED DESTRUCTION OF COURT RECORDS
IN ACCORDANCE with the Records Disposal (Courts) Rules, notice is given that three (3) months after the date of publication of this notice, the Principal Magistrates Court at Kerugoya, intends to apply to the Chief Justice/President of Supreme Court, for leave to destroy the records, books and papers of the Senior Principal Magistrate’s Court at Kerugoya as set out below:
Criminal cases                                    2001–2006
Traffic Cases                                      2001–2006
Miscellaneous cases                           2001–2006
A comprehensive list of all the condemned records that qualify to be disposed under the Act can be obtained and perused at the Senior Principal Magistrate’s Registry, Kerugoya.
Any person desiring the return of any exhibit in any of the above cases must make his/her claim within the time stipulated in this publication should do so before the expiry of the notice.
All exhibits to which no claim is substantiated before the destruction of the records shall under section 4 be deemed to be part of the records for the purposes of destruction.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
W. F. ANDAYI,
Senior Principal Magistrate, Kerugoya

						
				Page: 2208GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5815
THE RECORDS DISPOSAL (COURTS) RULES
(CAP. 14, SUB. LEG.)
IN THE CHIEF MAGISTRATE’S COURT AT KIBERA
INTENDED DESTRUCTION OF COURT RECORDS
IN ACCORDANCE with the Records Disposal (Courts) Rules, notice is given that three (3) months after the date of publication of this notice, the Chief Magistrates Court at Kibera, intends to apply to the Chief Justice/President of Supreme Court, for leave to destroy the records, books and papers of the Chief Magistrate’s Court at Kibera as set out below:
Criminal cases                                    2006–2010
Traffic Cases                                      2006–2010
Miscellaneous cases                           2006–2010
Inquest Cases                                     2006–2010
A comprehensive list of all condemned records that qualify to be disposed under the Act can be obtained and perused at the Chief Magistrate’s Registry, Kibera.
Any person desiring the return of any exhibit in any of the above cases must make his/her claim within the time stipulated in this publication should do so before the expiry of the notice.
All exhibits to which no claim is substantiated before the destruction of the records shall under section 4 be deemed to be part of the records for the purposes of destruction.
Dated the 6th July, 2014.
ONGINJO,
Chief Magistrate, Kibera.

						
				Page: 2208GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5816
THE KENYA SCHOOL OF LAW
(NO. 26 OF 2012)
PUPILAGE AND PASSING OF EXAMINATIONS
PURSUANT to section 19 and 20 of the Kenya School of Law Act, 2012 of the laws of Kenya, it is notified that the following 10 (ten) persons:

Adm. No.


Name


2008245


Mmwirichia Gaylene Makena,


2009589


Ooga Ascar Kwamboka,


20120066


Barasah Gloriah Nasimiyu,


20120089


Chege Watson Karagathu,


20120623


Musembi Elizabeth Mwelu,


20120676


Mwangi Joseph Muraya,


20120801


Nyabuti Clare Nyaboke,


20121101


Waititu Mary Wangui,


2012161


Muigai Githu,


2010673


Ochieng David Ouma,

have complied with the provisions of section 13 of the Advocates Act as to pupilage and passing of examinations subject to such exemptions as may have been granted under subsection (2) of the section.
Dated the 8th August, 2014.
P. L. O. LUMUMBA,
Director/Chief Executive and
Secretary, Kenya School of Law Board.

						
				Page: 2208GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5817
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES ACT
(CAP. 490)
CANCELLATION ORDER
WHEREAS I am of the opinion that Burutu Farmers Co-operative Society Limited (CS/16380) should be dissolved, now pursuant to section 62 (1) of the Co-operative Societies Act, I order the cancelletion of the said society.
Any member of the Society may within thirty (30) days from the date of this order appeal to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for Co-operative against the order.
Dated the 11th August, 2014.
P. L. M. MUSYIMI,
MR/5692138           Commissioner for Co-operative Development.

						
				Page: 2209GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5818
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES ACT
(CAP. 490)
APPOINTMENT OF LIQUIDATOR
(EXTENSION ORDER)
WHEREAS by liquidation appointment order dated 6th August, 2013, I appointed Stanley W. Ongeti, Senior Assistant Commissioner for Co-operative Development, P.O. Box 40811, Nairobi, to be liquidator of Keekonyokie FCS Limited (in liquidation) (CS/1721) for a period not exceeding one year and whereas the said Stanley W. Ongeti has not completed the exercise.
Now therefore, I extend the period of the liquidation with effect from the 6th August, 2014 for another period not exceeding one year for the said Stanley W. Ongeti, to act as liquidator in the matter of the said Co-operative Society.
Dated the 12th August, 2014.
P. L. M. MUSYIMI,
MR/5692138           Commissioner for Co-operative Development.

						
				Page: 2209GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5819
THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT
(CAP. 286)
COMPLETION OF PART DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(PDP No. 321/014/01 for Existing Site for Kenya Scouts Association, Alego Usonga Sub-County, Siaya County)
NOTICE is given that the above-mentioned part development plan was on February, 2014, completed.
The development plan relates to land situated within Siaya Town.
Copies of the part development plan have been deposited for public inspection at the offices of the County Physical Planning Offier, Siaya County, County Commissioner, Siaya County and Alego Usonga Sub-County Administrator’s office.
The copies so deposited are available for inspection free of charge by all persons interested at offices of the County Physical Planning Offier, Siaya County, County Commissioner, Siaya County and Alego Usonga Sub-County Administrator’s office, between the hours of 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. Monday to Friday.
Any interested person who wishes to make any representation in connection with or objection to the above-named part development plan may send such representations or objections in writing to be received by the County Physical Planning Officer, P.O. Box 925–40600, Siaya, within sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this notice and such representation or objection shall state the grounds on which it is made.
Dated the 28th April, 2014.
CAROLINE W. MATHENGE,
MR/5692199                            for Director of Physical Planning.

						
				Page: 2209GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5820
THE ANTI-CORRUPTION AND ECONOMIC CRIMES ACT
(CAP. 65)
THE ETHICS AND ANTI-CORRUPTION COMMISSION ACT
(CAP. 65A)
THE ETHICS AND ANTI-CORRUPTION COMMISSION
THE SECOND QUARTERLY REPORT FOR THE YEAR 2014 COVERING THE PERIOD 1ST APRIL, 2014 TO 30TH JUNE, 2014
Preamble
The Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission is required under section 36 of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003, to prepare quarterly reports setting out the number of reports made to the Director of Public Prosecutions under Section 35 of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003 as read with Section 11(1) (d) of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2011.
Section 36 provides that:
The Commission shall prepare quarterly reports setting out the number of reports made to the Director of Public Prosecutions under section 35 and such other statistical information relating to those reports, as the Commission considers appropriate.
A quarterly report shall indicate if a recommendation of the Commission to prosecute a person for corruption or economic crime was not accepted.
The Commission shall give a copy of each quarterly report to the Attorney-General.
The Attorney-General shall lay a copy of each quarterly report before the National Assembly.
The Commission shall cause each quarterly report to be published in the Gazette.
This report is therefore made pursuant to section 36 of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003. The report covers the Second Quarter of the year 2014, and is for the period commencing 1st April, 2014 to 30th June, 2014.
INVESTIGATION REPORTS COVERING THE PERIOD 1ST APRIL TO 30TH JUNE, 2014
EACC/ KSM/ INQ /FI/04/2012
Inquiry into allegations of embezzlement of public funds and corruption in the award of the contract for the reconstruction of the Moi Kisumu Stadium
Investigations established that during the 2011-2012 financial year, the Ministry of Youth and Sports allocated funds for the renovation of the Moi Stadium, Kisumu. The Ministry thereafter entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the stadium owners, the Municipal Council of Kisumu to undertake the renovations.
Investigations established that the tender for the renovation was advertised and the evaluation process commenced. Contrary to the requirement that an evaluation committee should be appointed for purposes of evaluation of bids, in this particular case, the bids were evaluated by a single person. Nonetheless, an Evaluation report was compiled and signed by persons who did not participate in the evaluation. Investigations also established that the bidder who was awarded the contract for the renovation was not qualified since they did not meet the mandatory requirements in the tender documents and had used false documents while submitting their bids. The award was therefore irregular. The evidence obtained further revealed that the company awarded the tender received payment of a sum of Kshs. 8.5 million for services that were not adequately rendered.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 24th June, 2014 with recommendations that all the suspects involved in the irregular procurement and payment be charged with various offences as follows; the District accountant and Provincial Director of Sports, Kisumu be charged with the offences of fraudulently making payment from public revenue contrary to section 45(2)(a) (iii), fraudulent disposal of public property contrary to section 45(1) (b ), abuse of office contrary to section 46 and wilful failure to comply with the law relating to management of public funds contrary to section 45 (1) (b) of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003; the Kisumu East District Procurement Officer be charged with the offences of wilful failure to comply with the law relating to procurement contrary to section 45 (1) (b) of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003; The Kisumu East District Works Officer be charged with failure to comply with the law relating to procurement contrary to section 45 (2 ) (b) and abuse of office contrary to section 46 of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act,2003; The Kisumu County Quantity Surveyor be charged with abuse of office contrary to section 46 of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003; the partners of the contractor awarded the contract together with his agent be charged with fraudulent acquisition of public property contrary to section 45(2) (a) of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003 and making a false document contrary to section 347 of the Penal Code. The contractor be charged with uttering a false document contrary to section 353 of the Penal Code and the Provincial Auditor Kisumu and the Kisumu East District Agricultural Officer be charged with the offence of fraudulent acquisition of public property contrary to section 45 (1) (a) of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On 2nd July, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
KACC/FI/INQ/44/2007
Inquiry into allegations of misappropriation of funds from the National Aids Control Council (NACC) by officials of a Community Based Organization (CBO) in Eldoret North
Investigations established that the CBO which is engaged in AIDS awareness campaign and helping of orphans in Eldoret North received a grant of Kshs. 200,000 from NACC. Two officials of the group who were signatories to the group’s bank account withdrew the said money but did not inform the other group members. Investigations also established that whereas the money was to be used for the group’s activities, the two suspects diverted it to their own use and could not account for it. They also prepared false vouchers purporting that the money had been expended for the intended purpose of the group. The evidence obtained showed that they were culpable for the embezzlement of the money.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 4th April, 2014  with recommendations that the two officials of the CBO be charged with the offences of fraudulent acquisition of public property contrary to section 45 (1) (a) of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003, Deceiving principal contrary to section 41 (2) of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003; forgery contrary to section 349  of the Penal code and uttering false documents contrary to section 353 of the Penal Code.
On 13th May, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
EACC INQ/13/2013
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against Public Health Officers attached to Huruma, Nairobi County
The investigations established that the suspects, who were all Public Health Officers, Huruma, Nairobi County corruptly solicited for a benefit of Kshs. 60,000 from the complainant as an inducement to forbear charging him with offences under the Public Health Act. The investigations further established that whereas the complainant reported that the three officers had solicited for a benefit, the taped conversation did not establish this solicitation. In addition, the money that one of the officers who is said to have received it from the complainant was not recovered from him. The Commission was of the opinion that the evidence obtained would not meet the threshold to sustain charges of corruption against the suspects. This notwithstanding, the Commission was of the opinion that the conduct of the three suspects was one that brought their position as public officers in disrepute, and their integrity was put into question.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 21st May, 2014 with recommendations that administrative action be taken against the three suspects.
On 23rd June, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for administrative action.
CR. 434/13/2014
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against the Principal of Wakaela Secondary School, Machakos
The investigations established that the suspect, who is the Principal of Wakaela Secondary School solicited for a benefit of Kshs. 30,000 from the complainant as an inducement to release the payment of money to the complainant in respect of a tender for the supply of computers, computer accessories and stationery to the school. The suspect also received a benefit of Kshs. 10,000.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 21st May, 2014 with recommendations that the suspect be charged with the offences of corruptly soliciting for and receiving a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (a)  as read with Section 48 (1) of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On 2nd July, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
CR. 123/105/2014 CF. NAIROBI ACC. NO. 1/2014
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against the District Registration Officer Kasarani
The investigations established that the suspect, who is the District Registration Officer, Kasarani corruptly solicited for and received a benefit of Kshs. 5,000 from the complainant as an inducement to process identity card application forms in respect of the complainant. The suspect also received a benefit of Kshs. 5,000.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 19th May, 2014  with recommendations that the suspect be charged with the offences of corruptly soliciting for and receiving a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (a)  as read with Section 48 (1) of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On 23rd June, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
CR.255/255/91/2014
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against Police Officers attached to Kenya Power and Lighting Nyeri Office and the Nyeri Police Station
Investigations by the Commission established that the suspects corruptly solicited for a benefit of Kshs. 100,000 from the complainant as an inducement to exonerate him from allegations implicating him in connection with the vandalism of electrical transformers in Nyeri Town. However, the suspects did not receive the benefit from the complainant but one of the suspects was arrested after demonstrating his willingness to receive Kshs. 50,000 from the complainant.  
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 11th June, 2014 with recommendations that the suspects be charged with the offences of corruptly soliciting for and agreeing to receive a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (a)  as read with Section 48 (1) of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On 30th June, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
EACC/FI/INQ/74/2013
Inquiry into allegations of theft of USD 8500 by the Chief Executive Officer, Football Kenya Federation (FKF)
The investigations established that sometime in November, 2011, the National Football team, Harambee Stars travelled to Dar-es salaam for a CECAFA Senior Challenge tournament. At the time of the travel, CECAFA had not released the money for the air tickets for the players, and they requested the Football Kenya Federation (FKF) to meet the travel costs. This was on the understanding that CECAFA would refund the said money to FKF. Investigations further established that CECAFA refunded the sum of USD 8500 to the FKF through its Chief Executive Officer (CEO). Investigations established that the CEO did not account for the said money and he was therefore accountable for its loss.
The Commission was of the opinion that failure to account for this money amounted to an offence. However, since the funds received were not public funds within the meaning of public property as defined in the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, the Commission was satisfied that an offence under the Act would not be sustained.
 A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 19th May, 2014 with recommendations that the Inquiry file together with the result of investigation be submitted to the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) to charge the suspect with appropriate charges.
On 2nd July, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for referral of the matter to the CID.
EACC/FI/1NQ/38/2013
Inquiry into allegations that a parcel of land measuring 100 acres in Liyavo Settlement Scheme, Trans Zoia was irregularly acquired by a former Ambassador to the detriment of squatters living on the said Scheme
The investigations established that the Liyavo Scheme was initially part of land parcel known as Number 5751 within Trans zoia District owned by white settlers. The Settlement Fund Trustee (SFT) later purchased this land and squatters were allowed to reside and work on the said land and issued with Temporary Occupational Certificates. They were later allocated 5 acres for subsistence farming. Investigations further established that a policy was adopted to dispose of the expensive farms and houses in the scheme which were offered to persons who were able to comply with the SFT loaning conditions.
The former ambassador applied for allocation of 100 acres on which stood a farm house in the scheme. He was allocated the said land in 1983 and he subsequently cleared the SFT loan and was later issued with a Clearance Certificate and subsequently a Title deed. The investigation did not reveal sufficient evidence to conclusively prove that the former ambassador illegally acquired 100 acres from Liyavo Settlement Scheme.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 30th May, 2014 with recommendations that the inquiry file be closed.
On 30th June, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for closure.
EACC/FI/INQ/1/2012
Inquiry into allegations that the Multi Media University (MMU) irregularly awarded the contract for the renovation of a communication laboratory building at a cost of KSh. 7,055,560 without following the Public Procurement and Disposal Regulations
Investigations established that sometime in 2010, the management of the MMU decided to renovate the communication laboratory building which was in a bad state. Estimates were prepared and tenders invited. Investigations established that pre-qualified contractors were invited and after the submitted bids were evaluated, the tender was awarded to the lowest responsive bidder. However, before the renovations could commence, it was discovered that the contractor awarded the contract had not been eligible since they were not registered with the Ministry of Public Works which was a mandatory requirement, and had submitted a false registration certificate. The contract to the said contractor was thus cancelled and the tender re-awarded to the second lowest evaluated bidder.
The investigations established that the MMU used restricted tendering in regard to the tender for the renovation. This was approved by its tender committee. The investigation also established that as a matter of fact, the entity largely adhered to the public procurement and disposal Act and Regulations. The only error made was with regard to inviting some of the bidders who were not in the pre- qualified list. However, a justification for this was given to the effect that these additional bidders outside the pre-qualified list had been evaluated by the entity in similar other projects being undertaken at the University and for which they had been found to be technically competent. Before they were so invited, the Tender Committee also gave its approval after being satisfied with the justification given.
The Commission did not find sufficient evidence to prove culpability on the part of the officers at the MMU involved in the particular procurement.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 11th June, 2014 with recommendation s for closure of the inquiry file.
On 1st July, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for closure of the inquiry file.
EACC/SA/FI/INQ/7/2013
Inquiry into allegations that the former Member of Parliament for Kaloleni Constituency abused his office to irregularly benefit contractors and himself by awarding them CDF projects and in return received kickbacks from them
The investigations established that several CDF project were initiated in Kaloleni Constituency. These included construction of classrooms in various secondary schools in the Constituency. Whereas it was alleged that the former MP influenced the award of the CDF projects to various contractors, investigations did not reveal any such influence. Investigations further established that due process was followed in the award of the contracts and the authenticity of the documents submitted to the Commission purporting the influence by the former MP were found to be questionable. Investigations did not reveal that the MP received any kickbacks as alleged. There was no evidence of wrongdoing on the part of the MP to warrant any action to be taken against him.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 24th April, 2014 with recommendations that the inquiry file be closed.
On 23rd May, 2014, the DPP returned the file for further investigations.
EACC/FI/INQ/49/2013
Inquiry into allegations that the Eldoret South Constituency Development Fund Tender Committee irregularly awarded a tender for the construction of the Bindura-Chepkoiyo Road project to a private company 
Investigations established that in the financial year 2010/2011, the Eldoret South Constituency Development Committee (CDFC) prioritized the rehabilitation of several roads including the Bindura- Chepkoiyo road.  The National CDF Board approved the project and allocated a sum of KSh. 2.5 million. The Eldoret South Constituency Development Fund Committee invited bids from pre-qualified contractors. After the evaluation of the bids process, the contract for the construction of the road was awarded to a private company.
Investigations revealed that the tendering process was done in accordance with the provisions of the Public Procurement and Disposal Act, 2005. No culpability was established on the part of the officials of the CDFC. However, it was established that the final inspection of the road project was not done by the Project Implementation Committee. In this regard, the Commission was of the opinion that before the contractor can be paid for work done, which payment had been suspended pending this investigation, then the Project Implementation Committee should inspect the works and prepare a final inspection certificate. Nonetheless, no culpability was established in regard to the procurement process.
A report was compiled and forward to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 24th June, 2014 with recommendations for closure of the inquiry file.
On 1st July, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for closure.
CR. 735/259/2013
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against the Member of the County Assembly (MCA) representing Ngong Ward
Investigations established that the MCA corruptly solicited for a benefit of Kshs. 40,000 from the complainant as an inducement to facilitate the allocation of a plot to the complainant for the purpose of starting a car wash business within Ngong Town. The suspect also received a benefit of KSh. 38, 000 through an agent.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 11th April, 2014 with recommendations that the suspect be charged with the offences of corruptly soliciting for and receiving a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (a) as read with Section 48 (1) of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On 23rd June, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
EACC/FI/INQ/07/2012
Inquiry into allegations of false mileage claim against the former Director of Legal Services at the Truth Justice and Reconciliation Commission (TJRC)
Investigations established that sometime in 2011, the TJRC organized a Civic Education drive as a precursor to the public hearings in the North Eastern Province. One of the TJRC officers involved in the civic education was the Director of Legal Services at the Commission. Investigations established that he received an imprest of KSh. 205,000 to cater for per diem, fuel, security and contingencies.
Investigations established that the TJRC officials travelled to North Eastern for the exercise. Investigations further revealed that during the time of the surrender of the imprest, the officer used false fuel receipts to account for the imprest received. The questioned receipts were submitted to the Document Examiner to establish the author. The report of the Document Examiner revealed that the false receipts were made by the officer who received the imprest and two others. However, a second examination of the same receipts was requested by the said officer, and the subsequent report from the Document Examiner revealed that they were not authored by the suspects. There was therefore no conclusive evidence that the officer who surrendered the imprest made the false documents.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 8th April, 2014, with recommendations that the inquiry file be closed.
On 1st July, 2014, the DPP returned the file for further investigations.
CR. 511/473/2013
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against a Revenue Officer, Kenya Revenue Authority Garissa.
The investigations established that the suspect, who is an employee of the Kenya Revenue Authority solicited for a benefit of KSh. 500 from the complainant as an inducement to facilitate the processing of a Tax Compliance Certificate. The suspect also received a benefit.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 19th May, 2014 with recommendations that the suspect be charged with the offences of corruptly soliciting for and receiving a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (a)  as read with Section 48 (1) of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On  27th May, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
CR.831/871/2013
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against a Parking Attendant, Uasin Gishu County Government
The investigations established that the suspect, who is a Parking Attendant in Eldoret, Uasin Gishu County corruptly solicited for a benefit of KSh. 1,000 from the complainant as an inducement to forbear the enforcement of the payment of KSh. 2,500 as a penalty for wrongful parking. The suspect also received a benefit.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 19th May, 2014 with recommendations that the suspect be charged with the offences of corruptly soliciting for and receiving a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (a)  as read with Section 48 (1) of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On 1st July, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
EACC. NO. 12 Of 2013
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against officers of the Kenya Power and Lighting Company based in Molo
The investigations established that three of the suspects were employees of KPLC whereas a fourth suspect was a private electrician. Investigations established that two of the suspects asked for ‘chai ya wazee’ but did not elaborate, whereas the private electrician solicited for a benefit of KSh. 2,000 in order to connect electricity to the complainant’s premises. Investigations further established that none of the suspects received a benefit from the complainant and the private electrician who had specifically demanded for a benefit disappeared and has not been traced.  It was further established that when the private electrician asked for money, he was not acting on behalf of another person. Therefore the elements of the offence of corruption could not be proved. The Commission was of the opinion that the evidence obtained was not sufficient to sustain any charges against all the suspects.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 8th May, 2014 with recommendations that administrative action be taken against the three public officers.
On 19th June, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation that administrative action be taken against the three public officers who are employees of Kenya Power and Lighting Company Limited, Molo.
CR. 123/105/2014 CF. NAIROBI ACC. NO. 1/2014
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against three private individuals in Kilungu
The investigations established that the suspects corruptly offered a benefit of Kshs. 50,000 to the complainant in exchange for an acquittal of the accused persons in a criminal case pending before the Kilungu Magistrates Court. The investigations established that the suspects wanted to influence the complainant to give a favourable judgment in a case involving their relatives. The suspects were arrested before they could give the benefit offered but the sum of KSh. 50,000 was recovered from one of them.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 25th April, 2014 with recommendations that the suspects be charged with the offence of corruptly offering a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (b) of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On 19th May, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
EACC/INQ/15/2014
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against an Enforcement Officer, County Government of Nakuru
The investigations established that the suspect corruptly solicited for a benefit of KSh. 5,000 from the complainant as an inducement to allow him to construct a shade outside his kiosk. The suspect also received a benefit of Kshs. 3,000 from the complainant. He was arrested and arraigned before the Nakuru Anti- Corruption Court and charged with the offences of corruptly soliciting for and receiving a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (a) of the Anti- Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 3rd April, 2014 with recommendations that the case against the suspect proceed to its logical conclusion.
On 19th May, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
CR.145/73/2014
Inquiry into allegations of corruption against a Traffic Police Officer attached to Langata Police Traffic Department
The investigations established that the suspect, who is a traffic police officer attached to Langata Police Station corruptly solicited for a benefit of KSh. 3,000 from the complainant as an inducement to forbear charging the complainant with a traffic offence. The suspect also received a benefit of KSh. 2,000.
A report was compiled and forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 27th May, 2014 with recommendations that the suspect be charged with the offences of corruptly soliciting for and receiving a benefit contrary to section 39 (3) (a)  as read with Section 48 (1) of the Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act, 2003.
On 23rd June, 2014, the DPP accepted the recommendation for prosecution.
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF FILES FORWARDED TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

Total No. of files forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions


19


No. of files recommended for prosecution


11


No. of files recommended for administrative or other action


3


No. of files recommended for closure


5


No. of files recommended for prosecution and the cases are already lodged before Court


9


No. of files where recommendation to prosecute accepted


11


No. of files where recommendation for administrative or other action accepted


3


No. of files where recommendation for closure accepted


3


No. of files returned for  further investigations


2


No. of files where recommendation to prosecute not accepted


0


No. of files where recommendation for administrative or other action not accepted


0


No. of files where closure not accepted


0


No. of files awaiting Director of Public Prosecution’s action


0

Dated the 11th August, 2014.
HALAKHE D. WAQO,
Secretary/Chief Executive Officer

						
				Page: 2212GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5687
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CEMTECH LIMITED STAFF HOUSING ESATE PROJECT SEBIT, WEST POKOT COUNTY, KENYA
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Cemtech Limited) is proposing to construct 300 Staff Housing Estate project at Sebit/Chepchoi sites in Pokot County.
The proponent proposes to construct 300 Staff Housing units categorized as types A to D for staff in descending level of cadre or seniority. Type A will have two bedrooms and a guest room each, type B will be smaller and two bedrooms each, type C will have two bedrooms each but smaller in size compared to that of a type B house and type D will have one bedroom each. Respective square areas covered by each unit for the categories A to D are 195 m2, 100 m2, 80        m2 and 45 m2. Types B to D will be arranged such that they are house clusters of one storey. Play grounds, school and hospitals are part of the plan and will be implemented in a different phase.
 The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Air pollution


Suitable wet suppression techniques need to be utilized in all exposed areas.
All unnecessary traffic must be strictly limited on site speed controls are to be enforced.
Ensure that the site is located away from such pollution sources.
Use of unleaded fuel to be encouraged.
Use of bicycles within the estate to be encouraged.


Solid waste generation
 


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: 1. Source reduction 2. Recycling 3.Composting and reuse 4. Combustion 5. Sanitary land filling.
Provide solid waste handling facilities such as rubbish bags and skips.
Ensure that solid wastes generated at the housing units are regularly disposed of appropriately at authorized dumping sites.
Ensure that occupants of the housing units manage their waste efficiently through recycling, reuse and proper disposal procedures.
Donate redundant but serviceable equipment to charities and institutions.
A private company to be contracted to collect and dispose solid waste on regular intervals.


Vegetation and animal disturbance
 


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area to be affected by construction works.
Specify locations for trailers and equipment, and areas of the site which should be kept free of traffic, equipment, and storage.
Designate access routes and parking within the site.
Preserve of some individual trees within the site.
Introduction of vegetation (trees, shrubs and grass) on open spaces and their maintenance.
Design and implement an appropriate landscaping programme to help in re-vegetation of part of the project area after construction.


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion
 


Surface runoff and roof water shall be harvested and stored in underground reservoir for reuse.
A storm water management plan that minimizes impervious area infiltration by use of recharge areas and use of detention and/or retention with graduated outlet control structure will be designed.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.
Site excavation works to be planned such that a section is completed and rehabilitated before another section begins.
Roof catchments will be used to collect the storm water for some domestic uses.


Dust emission
 


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles
Personal Protective equipment to be worn.


Exhaust emission
 


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized.
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained
Sensitise truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/offloading points and parking areas, and to switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points.


Noise and vibration
 


Sensitise construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitise construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, residential areas and hospitals.
The noisy construction works will entirely be planned to be during day time when most of the neighbours will be at work.
Ensure that all generators and heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.


Incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences
 


Ensure that provisions for reporting incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences during construction using prescribed forms obtainable from the local Occupational Health and Safety Office (OHSO) are in place.
Enforcing adherence to safety procedures and preparing contingency plan for accident response in addition safety education and training shall be emphasized.


Fire protection
 


Firefighting equipment such as fire extinguishers and hydrant systems should be provided at strategic locations such as stores and construction areas.
Regular inspection and servicing of the equipment must be undertaken by a reputable service provider and records of such inspections maintaine.
Signs such as “NO SMOKING” must be prominently displayed within the estate, especially in parts where inflammable materials are stored.


Oil Spills


A designated garage section of the site fitted with oil trapping equipments to be planned for changes. Such a area will be well protected from contaminating the soil.


Mushrooming of informal settlement


Control of informal activities around the project site.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, West Pokot County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692035              National Environment Management Authority.

						
				Page: 2214GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5688
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT L.R NO. 2951/434 IN KITISURU NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Shiloah Investments Limited) is proposing to put up a commercial and Recreational Development on L.R. No.2951/434,  Ngecha Road in Kitisuru, Nairobi City, Nairobi County.
The development on a 3.6 acres plot is proposed to include Retail Shopping Units, Banks, Food & Beverage Outlets, Office Space, Automotive Retail Unit, Children Recreation Area, Healthcare Facilities and Conferencing Facilities
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Vegetation/biodiversity  disturbance


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area to be affected by construction works.
Specify locations for trailers and equipment, and areas of the site which should be kept free of traffic, equipment, and storage.
Designate access routes and parking within the site.
Introduction of vegetation (trees, shrubs and grass) on open spaces and their maintenance.
Design and implement an appropriate landscaping programme to help in re-vegetation of part of the project area after construction.


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


Storm water to be harvested and recycled for utilization within the project site. Disposal of storm water that will not be harvested will be via surface drain off.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.
Ensure that any compacted areas are ripped to reduce run-off.
Open drains all interconnected will be provided on site.


Solid waste generation
 


Provide solid waste handling facilities such as waste bins and skips.
Apply an Integrated Solid Waste Management approach (reduce, recycle, combustion and sanitary land filling).
All refuse generated should be properly transported and disposed at designated areas.


Dust emission


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal Protective equipment to be worn.


Exhaust emission


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Sensitise truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/offloading points and parking areas, and to switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points.


Noise and vibration


Sensitise construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitise construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, residential areas and hospitals.
Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation.
Ensure that all generators and heavy-duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.
The noisy construction works will entirely be planned to be during daytime when most of the neighbours will be at work.
Comply with the provisions of Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009 regarding noise limits at the workplace.


Increased energy consumption


Ensure electrical equipment, appliances and lights are switched off when not being used.
Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.
Ensure planning of transportation of materials to ensure that fossil fuels (diesel, petrol) are not consumed in excessive amounts.
Monitor energy use during construction and set targets for reduction of energy use.


High water demand


Install water conserving taps that turn-off automatically when water is not being used.
Promote recycling and reuse of water as much as possible.
Install a discharge meter at water outlets to determine and monitor total water usage.
Promptly detect and repair of water pipe and tank leaks.
Sensitise staff to conserve water by avoiding unnecessary water use.
Ensure taps are not running when not in use.


Generation of wastewater


Provide means for handling sewage generated by construction workers.
Conduct regular checks for pipe blockages or damages since such vices can lead to release of the effluent into the land and water bodies.
Monitor effluent quality regularly to ensure that the stipulated discharge rules and standards are not violated.


Incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences.


Ensure that provisions for reporting incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences during construction using prescribed forms obtainable from the local Occupational Health and Safety Office (OHSO) are in place.
Enforcing adherence to safety procedures and preparing contingency plan for accident response in addition safety education and training shall be emphasized.

 

Insecurity


Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the construction site.
Body-search the workers on entry, to avoid getting weapons on site, and leaving site to ensure nothing is stolen.
Ensure only authorized personnel get to the site.
Security alarms will be installed.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692136           National Environment Management Authority

						
				Page: 2215GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5689
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED FUEL FILLING  STATION ON PLOT L.R NO. 4885/124 AND 4885/125 IN RIRONI KIKUYU, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Astrol Petroleum Company Limited) is proposing to set up a fuel filling station on Plot L.R No. 4885/124 and 4885/125 Rironi Kikuyu, Kiambu County
The proposed project will contain the following components: underground storage tanks with vents and breathers, oilinterceptor and septic tank, fuel dispensers under steel canopy, service bays such as tyre centre, car wash and repair shop, drive way and car park, management offices, compound work and walls.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures 


Occupational health and safety


Environmental Management Plan and a workable and cost effective implementation plan be put in place during the construction and operations phases.
All activities be carried out in ensuring better working conditions and compliance with the legal requirements.


Waste generation


The materials that cannot be re-used should be disposed of at designated sites as stipulated in the environmental laws.
Proper waste disposal.
Provision of waste collection bins for easier waste segregation and disposal of waste.


Rocks from excavation, concrete and block off-cut chips


The soil excavated will be re-used in filling and leveling the foundation which should be minimal
All the un-usable component be transported and disposed in designated areas.

 

Soil erosion and degradation


The soil excavated will be re-filling the foundations
Control earthworks to avoid interfering with land not to be built upon.

 

Construction materials


Use of standard materials already certified by the government.
Comply with the building code on structural configurations and materials to be used.


Visual enhancement


Use of colors and structures that enhance visual façade.
Paint entire walls and external entrances to render well to general neighborhood.


Hydrology, drainage and ground water resources


Storm water to be directed into the natural  drains.
Properly design drainage structures to prevent silting and soil erosion.


Water resources


Control usage of water to minimize wastage.
Install toilets flush with low volume cisterns and a long and short flush and push taps.
Rain water harvesting to prevent over dependence on already limited available water resources.


Biological resources


Landscaping and planting of fast growing trees, shrubs, grasses and ornamental flowers where possible.


Conflict resolution


Public consultation and interview.
No interference with the any structure or resource of public and cultural interest to the community.
The project will also create employment opportunities during construction and operations phases.


Occupational health and safety regulations


Awareness training sessions focusing on environmental, health and safety regulations, requirements of the Environmental Management and Coordination Act.
Prepare health and safety plan.
Adhere to the general matters, stipulated health, safety and workforce welfare regulations.
Provide workforce with safety wearing gear and enforce their use.


Emergencies and accident occurrences


Provision of personal protective clothing.
Protective clothing and safety gadgets to be provided to the workers and visiting clientele.
Emergency response plan.


Records of accidents


Records on number and nature of accidents and injuries to be maintained.


Air, dust and noise pollution


Dust protection gadgets to be provided to the workers.
Carry out off-site maintenance of trucks and machinery.


Social security and safety


Construction of perimeter fence.
Install basic security facilities such as street lighting and security alarms.


Road safety and access


Erection of warning signs and directions
Supervise movements of trucks and machinery at all times.


General risks and hazards


Building design schedules to comply with local authority specifications of building regulations.
Comply with Ministry of Work’s code regulations for earthquakes.
Comply with Kenya building code regulations for fire hazards.
Certification of construction materials.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692057         National Environment Management Authority.

						
				Page: 2216GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5690
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL STATION ON PLOT L.R NO 209/14652, PUMWANI DIVISION, KAMUKUNJI CONSTITUENCY NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Abdi Abdirahman Mohamed) is proposing to develop a petrol station on Plot L.R No .209/1452, Pumwani Division, Kamukunji Constituency Nairobi County.
The development will comprise of three underground petroleum products storage tanks. One of  50,000lts and other two of 70,000lts capacity , tyre centre, puncture repair, car wash, parking space for trucks and lorries, car service, Quick shop/ Mini supermarket, sanitary facilities and associated facilities.
The following are the anticipated impact and proposed mitigation measures.

Impact


Mitigation measures


Noise  Pollution


Ensure that all generators and  heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosure to minimize ambient noise levels.
Drivers to be  sensitized to avoid unnecessary gunning of vehicle engines or hooting
Proper and regular servicing of engines and other machines shall be adhered to.


Aesthetic values


Take all solid waste materials to designated disposal sites.
The landscaping programme should be maintained.


Air/ Dust Pollution


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limited regulations.
Where possible . avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to be worn.


Storm-Water


Open drains connected to NCC storm water drains should be well functioning at all times.
Such drains should also be fitted with oil filters.


 


 


 


Construction/provision of water storage tanks to collect storm water for cleaning uses.
Implementing of roof water harvesting


Security


Ensure the general safety and security all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the facility.


Health and safety


All workers must be provided with the necessary PPE
Ensure all workers are in protective gears all the time when on site.
Place fire extinguisher in strategic areas within the deport.Designate and mark smoking areas.
Workers should be trained as fire marshals
Fire escape routes to be shown clearly.
Provide enough first aid kits within the facility and have at least workers trained in first aid administering.
Emergency telephone number should be well displayed.

 

Spills


Take steps to prevent leaks and spills.Keep machinery, equipment, containers and tanks in good working condition and be careful when transferring used oil.Have sorbent materials available on site.
If a spill or leak occurs,stop the spill from flowing at the source.If a leak from a container or tank cant be stopped,put the product in another holding container or tank.
Contain spilled products.For example,containment can be accomplished by erecting sorbent berms or by spreading a sorbent over the spill.Develop a spill response action plan;Remove,repair or replace the defective tank or container immediately.
All grounds should cemented to prevent spills from leaking into underground water.
Do not discharge petroleum products to sewers,drainage ditches,septic tanks or streams.
Do not dispose of petroleum products  in  landfills or mix them with wastes thatwill  be disposed of in  landfills .Do not mix petroleum products with cleaning solvents .The resulting mixture  can be harzadous waste
Do not use petroleum  productsfor road oiling ,dust control ,weed  control, or for  similar purposes.
Keep storage containers closed when not actively adding or removing materials .When storing drums keep an aisle space between drums to allow for inspection for leaks and damage.
Install secondary containment to prevent the release of petroleum products to the environment-Inspect  the containers and secondary containment structure on a weekly basis to be certain that they are in good condition.Keep written records of these inspections
Cement all ground in the deport   to avoid leakage of petroleum products into underground water or contamination of soil.
Have good plans of emergency cases of spill.
Train all staff on hazard recognition,response plan implementation safety and clean up procedures ,and reporting,.


Fire protection


Signs such as NO SMOKING must be prominently displayed within the premises,especially in parts where inflammable materials are stored.
Fire fighting equipment should be provided at strategic locations such as stores and construction areas.


 


Regular inspection and servicing of the equipment must be undertaken by a reputable service provider and records of such inspections maintained.


Exhaust Emission


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where  leasable equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Sensitize truck drivers to  avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/ offloading points and parking areas, and to switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692315         National Environment Management Authority.

						
				Page: 2217GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5821
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL SERVICE STATION ON PLOT NO. KILIFI/CHASIMBA/449, CHASIMBA, KILIFI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Samwel Nyalle) proposes to construct a service station in Chasimba area, Kilifi County. The project will consist of the following: Structural steel canopy, concrete driveway to provide access into and from the service station, underground storage tank measuring 1500 x 1000 mm, 4 No. of fuel-dispensing pumps, 5 No. of toilet-rooms, a tire pressure device, a store, septic tank and soak pit.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measure:

Impact


Proposed mitigation measures


Water and soil contamination


Safety and emergence response plan to be developed with emphasis on protection of environment.
No uncontrolled discharges.


Increased fire and safety risks


Place fire extinguisher at conspicuous sites.
All emergency fire exists to be clearly marked.
Ensure safety warnings are conspicuously displayed (No. smoking, inflammable substances etc.).
Provide and enforce the use of personal protective equipment.
Ensure that operational and adequate fire extinguishers are on site.
Install fire alarms.
Maintain an accident register at the premises.


Safety and obstruction


Movement of construction vehicles and timed to operate during off-peak hours.
Observe and comply with traffic regulations and other by-laws.
Contracts to peak and implement a traffic management plan.
Provision of the necessary road signs and caution.


Air and noise pollution


Notify resident prior to project commencement.
The workers shall be trained on the management of air pollution from vehicles and machines.
Machines and vehicles to be serviced and maintained as per the manufacturers specifications.
Vehicles delivering soil materials shall be covered to reduce dust.
Dust generating activities (excavations) will not be carried out during times of strong winds.
Frequent watering of the site to reduce dust.
Stand by generator rooms to re-enforced with sound proof materials.


Public health deterioration


Develop a site health and safety plan, detailing, safety procedures, restricted sites.
A sign personal responsible for safety standards and precautions.
Provision of safety protective equipment.
Qualified personnel to supervise and enforce safety standards.
Recording of all incidences in the accident registrar and action taken.
Near-miss risks and accidents to be reported to avoid eminent problems.
The contractor and proponent shall take an active role in HIV/AIDS sensitization of the workers and the community.


Production of waste


Comply with the requirements of the environment.
Management (Waste Management) Regulations.
Develop a solid waste management plan prior to project commencing, identifying optimal waste re-use options and disposal areas.
Minimize waste production by utilizing best available techniques to site preparation.
Clearly designate and construct an appropriate waste collection facility or provide covered refuse skips.
Re-use construction waste to the maximum extent possible.
Proper handling and storage procures for hazardous waste e.g. fuel oil should be stored in areas with hard standing and containment to handle spills.


Energy utilization


Develop an energy management plan.
Construction machinery and vehicles should be maintained and used in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications, to maximize efficiency and lower use of energy.
Construction workers should be sensitized on the importance of energy management.
Install energy saving devices.
Institute alternative sources of energy e.g. solar panels.


Water utilization


Monitor water consumption and utilization.
Sensitize construction workers on the importance of proper water management.
Develop alternative sources e.g. rain water harvesting.


Leakage of tanks and products line


Insurance against the consequences of a spill contaminating groundwater or soil.
Monitor daily reconciliation of wet stock and inventory records.
Incase of suspect losses, institute tank and line integrity testing; and
Conduct a soil gas survey to check the extent of contamination from the leaks.


Waste water and waste oil management practices


Carefully collect used oil in drums and dispose of by licensed refuse contractor.
Adhere to Wastewater Management Regulation of the Legal Notice No. 121 and water Quality Regulations of Legal Notice No. 120.
Conduct wastewater monitoring to check compliance on monthly basis and submit the results to NEMA District Office for immediate approval of the station operations.
Document and train staff in the emergency spill response plan.


Solid waster generation and disposal (littering, soil and surface water pollution)


Comply with the requirements of Environmental Management (Waste Management) Regulations) Legal Notice No. 120.
Prepare a waste management plan.
Stop deposition of waste in open pits.
Clearly designate and construct and appropriate waste collection facility or provide covered refuse skips.
Segregate waste at source.
Monitor waste volumes.
Identify licensed waste disposal contractor to remove from site and monitor performance.
Carefully collect used oil in drums and dispose of by licensed refuse contractor.


Fire and accident


Provision and placement of appropriate fire extinguishers and training of personnel to handle emergency situations.
Provision of fully equipped First Aid Kit box on the site at all times.
Display warning signs at suitable locations.
Prohibit unauthorized persons at the station.
Weather proof fittings for all lighting and power points located outside the fuel station.


Air pollution


Ensure that the generators are maintained to manufactures specification, records maintained and availed whenever there is need.
Ensure that tank vents are located away from sensitive receptors.
Conduct solvent vapour monitoring.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5678551         National Environment Management Authority.

						
				Page: 2219GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5822
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) PLANT AND OIL DEPOT IN EMBAKASI AREA, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (East Africa Spectre Limited) is proposing to develop an LPG filling plant, white oil depot and offices in Embakasi, Nairobi County.
 The development will include five (5) LPG bullets of 100 tons each, three (3) oil tanks (AGO-10 Million litres, PMS-10 Million litres, IK-5 Million litres), White oil Loading gantry complete with loading arms, pumps, LPG road tanker offloading point, three manual cylinder filling points, LPG cylinders offloading zone, a segregated drainage system for the management of storm water and potentially, contaminated waste water, Firefighting facilities and approved pipe and pumping systems.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Changes in Hydrology/ impended drainage


Proper Installation of drainage structures.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures trough proper design and maintenance.
Provide gratings to the drainage channels.
Regular checks on any sludge along drainage channels.
Visual checks of oil interceptor and drainage channels for any leakage.


Soil Erosion


Control any earthworks.
Rehabilitate degraded environment to avoid siltation and wash offs.
Compact loose soils.
Landscaping.
Ensure management of excavation activities.
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures where necessary.
Proper disposal of excavated soil.


Air pollution


Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase of excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Engage sensitive construction workers.
Proper use of PPE.


Noise pollution


Maintain plant equipment.
Construction activities to be restricted to daytime.
Workers in the vicinity of or involved in high-level noise to wear respective safety & protective gear i.e. earplugs & earmuffs.
Appropriate selection of machinery.


Oil Spills


Proper storage, handling and disposal of new oil and used oil and related wastes.
Maintain plant and equipment to avoid leaks
Provide oil interceptors along the drains leading from AGO,PMS and IK loading area.


Water resource


Management of water usage.
Recycling of water at the construction phase where possible.
Use of water conservation signs at the wash rooms and install water conserving taps.


Contractors lay down area


Special attention should be paid to the sanitary facilities on site especially disposal of human waste.
Garbage should be disposed off in accordance with county government requirements.


Road Safety


Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles especially along road links leading to the site.
Provide bill boards at the site/entrance to notify motorists about the development.


Occupational Health and Safety
 


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure effective wastewater management.
Proper design of sewerage system.
Provide First Aid kits on the site.
Sensitize residents/workers on environmental management.
Ensure there is no ponding to eliminate breading of mosquitoes during construction.
Workers should be trained on occupational health and safety and first Aid administration.
Train staff on petroleum product handling.
Sensitize workers on HIV and AIDS.


Vegetation


Landscaping and planting all unpaved areas
Planting flowers / grassing should be done just before the rains or irrigated on dry spells.


Fire safety Training/
Emergency Response
Procedures (ERPs)
 


To enhance health and safety preparedness among stakeholders.
Ensure equipment is in good working condition.
Put up emergency response contacts.
Put up ERP notification instructions.
Put up simple instructions on how to handle fires, product spills, LPG incidents, armed robbery and product contaminations.


Record Keeping
 


Collection and analysis of relevant environmental data at the site.
Data of maintenance of firefighting equipment.
Daily product reconciliation (stock loss control).
Staff Training records.
Incidents and accidents registers.
Weekly inspection records of oil water interceptor and drainage systems.


Internal Audits
 


Monitoring will involve measurements, observations, evaluations, assessment of changes in water quality, waste management, Noise levels, contractor safety etc.


Fire Outbreak


Install fire-fighting equipment as provided by OSH Act.
Sensitize the residents on fire risks i.e. conduct regular fire drills
Adapt effective emergency response plans
Provide emergency numbers at strategic points.


Water Quality/Waste
Management


Follow NEMA regulations. Ensure registration of contracted garbage handlers with NEMA for compliance with the prevailing regulations


Security


Provide security guards and facilities during construction period.
Security guards should always be available to alleviate cases of robbery.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692419         National Environment Management Authority.

						
				Page: 2221GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5823
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MENENGAI ROLLLING MILLS ON LAND REFERENCE NO. DAGORETTI/KINOO 4835 IN KINOO DIVISION, MUTHIGA LOCATION, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Menengai Stores Limited) intends to establish a Sufuria (cooking pot) and wick production plant in Muthiga location, Kinoo Division, on plot L.R. No. Dagorretti/Kinoo/4835, in Kiambu County.
The proponent intends to construct godowns and aluminum-based factory for manufacturing of cooking pots, popularly known as ‘Sufuria’, from aluminium metal ingots. The premises will also be used for the production of lamp and cook-stove wicks.  The godowns will be used for storage of raw materials and finished goods.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Metal dust during preparation for smelting


Do not use drills & grinders or any power tools.
All workers on the production line MUST wear Personal Protective Equipment at all times.
Do not water blast or scrub with a stiff broom. Only use a manually controlled low pressure course garden horse.


Metal dust/ fibres during transportation


All vehicles transporting scrap metal should be covered.
All workers involved in the loading and offloading should wear PPE’s.


Stack, Grid  and tailpipe emissions


A 35 meter stack will be used.
Wet scrubbing of gases from the furnace to be employed so as to avert emission of NOx and SOx.
Removal of dust and particulate matter through cyclones and fabric filters.
Conduct Energy and Environmental audits to ascertain emission impacts.
Contribute to environmental protection activities such as tree planting that help sequester emitted carbon dioxide.
Ensure that company vehicles are well serviced to reduce tailpipe emissions.
Adhere to NEMA air quality regulations


Oil leaks and spills


Use well serviced vehicles and machinery.
Provide adequate servicing of vehicles and machinery on site.
Proper storage of petroleum products.


Noise and vibration


Usage of manual labour as much as possible.
Avoid use of explosives in construction works.
Avoid unnecessary hooting of vehicles.
Ensure all generators and heavy machinery are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize noise levels.


Increased water demand


Water for cooling & rolling is re-cycled throughout the process without release. The volumes are only lost due to evaporation.
Connection to city council water supply line.
Buildings to have roof rainwater harvesting and storage facilities.
Sinking of boreholes to complement city council water supply.
Detect and repair water pipes.
Install water conservation taps that turn off automatically when water is not in use.


Increased waste water generation


Waste water from the production line must be treated in accordance with proper industry standards.
Waste water shall not be released into the environment before treatment.
Conduct regular laboratory checks to ascertain the levels of heavy metals in waste water.
Strictly adhere to NEMA water quality regulations of 2006.


Increased solid waste proliferation


All wastes to be disposed at designated disposal sites/landfills.
Re-use or recycle packaging materials such as paper cartons, plastic containers and bags.
Provide collection containers especially hospital or laboratory wastes (different colours to allow waste segregation) at designated points on site.
Provide waste cubicles and Contract NEMA licensed private waste handlers.
All metal cuttings and waste to be recycled.


Increased vehicular traffic


Provide paved local access road networks.
Provide direct road access to Main road.
Provide adequate vehicle parking space.


Increased energy demand


Connection to main power line.
Provide solar lighting and water heating systems.
Installation of standby generators.
Provide energy saving (low power consumption) lighting bulbs.


Worker accidents and health risks


Employ skilled workers.
Train workers on safety issues.
Prepare clear work schedules and procedures.
Have a clear organizational plan at the site with an occupational, health and safety officer.
Provision of personal protection equipment.
Provide onsite training.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692276         National Environment Management Authority.

						
				Page: 2222GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5824
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED FUEL FILLING  STATION ON PLOT L.R. NO. 4885/124 AND 4885/125 IN RIRONI KIKUYU, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Astrol Petroleum Company Limited) is proposing to set up a fuel filling station on Plot L.R. No. 4885/124 and 4885/125 Rironi Kikuyu, Kiambu County
The proposed project will contain the following components: underground storage tanks with vents and breathers, oilinterceptor and septic tank, fuel dispensers under steel canopy, service bays such as tyre centre, car wash and repair shop, drive way and car park, management offices, compound work and walls.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures 


Occupational Health and Safety


Environmental Management Plan and a workable and cost effective implementation plan be put in place during the construction and operations phases.
All activities be carried out in ensuring better working conditions and compliance with the legal requirements.


Waste generation


The materials that cannot be re-used should be disposed of at designated sites as stipulated in the environmental laws
Proper waste disposal.
Provision of waste collection bins for easier waste segregation and disposal of waste.


Rocks from excavation, concrete and block off-cut chips


The soil excavated will be re-used in filling and leveling the foundation which should be minimal.
All the un-usable component be transported and disposed in designated areas.


Soil Erosion and Degradation


The soil excavated will be re-filling the foundations.
Control earthworks to avoid interfering with land not to be built upon.


Construction materials


Use of standard materials already certified by the government.
Comply with the building code on structural configurations and materials to be used.


Visual enhancement


Use of colors and structures that enhance visual façade.
Paint entire walls and external entrances to render well to general neighborhood.


Hydrology, drainage and ground water resources


Storm water to be directed into the natural  drains.
Properly design drainage structures to prevent silting and soil erosion.


Water resources


Control usage of water to minimize wastage.
Install toilets flush with low volume cisterns and a long and short flush and push taps.
Rain water harvesting to prevent over dependence on already limited available water resources.


Biological resources


Landscaping and planting of fast growing trees, shrubs, grasses and ornamental flowers where possible.


Conflict resolution


Public consultation and interview.
No interference with the any structure or resource of public and cultural interest to the community.
The project will also create employment opportunities during construction and operations phases.


Occupational Health and Safety Regulations


Awareness training sessions focusing on environmental, health and safety regulations, requirements of the Environmental Management and Coordination Act.
Prepare health and safety plan.
Adhere to the general matters, stipulated health, safety and workforce welfare regulations.
Provide workforce with safety wearing gear and enforce their use.


Emergencies and Accident Occurrences


Provision of personal protective clothing
Protective clothing and safety gadgets to be provided to the workers and visiting clientele.
Emergency response plan.


Records of Accidents


Records on number and nature of accidents and injuries to be maintained.


Air, Dust and Noise Pollution


Dust protection gadgets to be provided to the workers.
Carry out off-site maintenance of trucks and machinery.


Social Security and Safety


Construction of perimeter fence.
Install basic security facilities such as street lighting and security alarms.


Road Safety and Access


Erection of warning signs and directions
Supervise movements of trucks and machinery at all times.


General Risks and Hazards


Building design schedules to comply with local authority specifications of building regulations.
Comply with Ministry of Work’s code regulations for earthquakes.
Comply with Kenya building code regulations for fire hazards.
Certification of construction materials.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5692057         National Environment Management Authority.

						
				Page: 2223GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5825
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED EXCAVATION, LEVELING AND BACKFILLING OF A YARD AREA ON PLOT L.R. NO. MOMBASA/BLOCK XLVII/173 IN LIWATONI AREA OF MOMBASA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Marine Contractors (EPZ) Limited) proposes to set up a yard area on Plot L.R. No. Mombasa/Block XLVII/173 in Liwatoni area of Mombasa County. The project shall entail excavation, leveling and backfilling of the yard, use the excavated soil material to backfill the seafront area of the yard, effectively reclaiming an area measuring 0.5 acres.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Vegetation removal


Obtain authority from Kenya Forest Service to fell the trees on site.
Re-establish vegetation cover through landscaping of unpaved areas at the completion of leveling including replanting of neem trees and or casuarinas Spp.


Noise pollution


Use serviceable machinery for excavations
The topography of the area favors dispersal of noise seaward as opposed to landward.
Personnel working at the site will be provided with Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) such as earmuffs.
Comply with the Noise Regulations (Legal Notice No. 61 of 2009) at all times.


Solid wastes


Deploy a NEMA licensed waste handler
Comply with the waste management regulations


Health and Safety of workers


Provision of adequate and appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) including safety shoes, helmets, gloves, and overalls.
Employees to be given the correct tools and equipments for the jobs assigned.
Employees to be trained in the use of all equipment that they will be required to operate.
Rest times and breaks will be observed.
First aid services and an emergency vehicle to be readily available at site.
Moving parts of machines and sharp surfaces to be securely protected with guards to avoid unnecessary contacts and injuries during construction phase.
The contractor to implement the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act. No. 15 of 2007.


Water quality degradation


Use of course gravel and rock boulders from the excavation process rather than fine material for creation of bunds and backfilling.
Slowing down the tipping processes and funneling backfilling materials
Undertake construction of bunds and backfilling during low tides.
The construction of the bunds can be particularly planned to coincide with the spring low tides.
Use French drains and underground piping to ensure continued flow of fresh water into the creek area.
Decrease time frame over which the backfilling operation is to take place, to avoid the daily re-suspension of sediments.
Ameliorate the impacts of the daily re-suspension of sediments by the sanctioning of sediments that have resettled.


Impact on Marine life


Ensure that reclamation activities are conducted during the low tides to minimize impact on sea dwelling organisms.
Develop and implement a monitoring programme for marine life forms to determine resilience upon completion of the reclamation activities and seek the cooperation of Kenya Marine and Fisheries Institute (KMFRI) in this regard.
The rapid undertaking of the overall dredging operation to conceptually decrease the severity and range of impacts in space and time.
 


Tidal prism change


Reduce the gradient of the slopes of the bund used in reclamation.
Continually monitor the tidal regime change of the creek.
Restore ancient adjacent reclaimed and filled areas of the creek, which are not in use as constructed areas, into salt marshes in order to compensate the loss of tidal prism and the surface of intertidal areas.
Monitor the stability of adjacent properties regarding renewed tidal erosion and provide sufficient and suitable embankments.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5748526         National Environment Management Authority.

						
				Page: 2224GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5827
TARAN ENGINEERING WORKS LIMITED
DISPOSAL OF UNCOLLECTED GOODS
NOTICE is given pursuant to the provisions of the Disposal of Uncollected Goods (Cap. 38) to the owners of the cylinder heads, blocks, crankshafts or any other items which were brought to our workshop for repair to take delivery of same from Taran Engineering Works Limited premises, P.O. Box 22821–00400, Nairobi, within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice upon payment of repairs undertaken, storage and any other incidental charges plus cost of publishing this notice, failure to which the said items will be sold as scrap by public auction or private treaty and the proceeds of the sale defrayed (set off) against all accrued charges.
M. S. MATHAROO,
MR/5692265           for Taran Engineering Works Limited.

						
				Page: 2224GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5828
RATNA APARTMENTS
DISPOSAL OF UNCOLLECTD GOODS
NOTICE is issued pursuant to the provisions of the Disposal of Uncollected Goods Act (Cap. 38) of the laws of Kenya, to the owner of motor vehicle reg. No. KBS 387B, presently lying uncollected at the premises of Ratna Apartments, along Gitanga Road, off Vanga Road, opposite Maria Immaculate Hospital, on L.R. No. 330/549, Nairobi. Further notice is given that unless the said motor vehicle is collected within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice, and upon payment of all outstanding amount and incidental costs incurred to Norwich Union Properties Limited, as at the date when delivery is taken, failure to which the said motor vehicle will be sold either by public auction or private treaty without any further reference to the owners and the proceeds of sale shall be defrayed against storage charges and any other accrued costs.
Dated the 7th August, 2014.
MICHAEL MAINA,
MR/5692121                                                    General Manager.

						
				Page: 2224GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5826
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT NAIROBI
MILIMANI LAW COURTS
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. 78 OF 2013
IN THE MATTER OF MWANGI KINYANJUI
RE: PRESUMPTION OF DEATH
EXPERTE: GACHOKI KAMAU AS INTERESTED PARTY
IN COURT ON 17TH JUNE, 2014 BEFORE JUSTICE A.O. MUCHELULE
ORDER
UPON READING the application dated 27th August, 2013, presented to this court on the 27th August by counsel fOr the Applicant under section 118 (a) of the Evidence Procedure Act, section 1A and 3A of the Civil Procedure Rules, Order 50 rule 1 of the Civil Procedure Rules and all enabling provisions of the law; and upon reading the affidavit of Gachoki Kamau sworn on 27th August, 2013, together with annexures; and upon hearing counsel for the Applicant:
IT IS hereby ordered:
(a) THAT Mwangi Kinyanjui (ID/6379611) be and is hereby presumed dead.
(b) THAT the advertisement be done in the Kenya Gazette within ninety days.
(c)  THAT the cost of this application be in the cause.
Given under my hand and the seal of this court at Nairobi this 17th day of June, 2014.
Issued at Nairobi this 8th day of July, 2014.
VINCENT KIPTOON,
                                                             Deputy Registrar, Nairobi.

						
				Page: 2224GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5829
AUTOTEC MOTOR GARAGE LIMITED
DISPOSAL OF UNCOLLECTD GOODS
NOTICE is issued pursuant to section 6 and 7 of the Disposal of Uncollected Goods Act (Cap. 38) of the laws of Kenya, to the owners of Toyota RAV4 motor vehicle reg. No. KBH 987R blue in colour and Toyota RAV4 motor vehicle reg. No. KBL 754R white in colour, presently lying uncollected at the premises of Autotec Motor Garage Limited, Nairobi, further notice is given that unless the motor vehicle is collected within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice and upon payment to Autotec Motor Garage Limited storage charges and other incidental costs of publishing this notice the same shall be disposed by way of auction without any further notice.
Dateed the 15th August, 2014.
IMRAN DHANJI & COMPANY,
MR/5692463           Advocates for Autotec Motor Garage Limited.

						
				Page: 2224GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5830
MBOI-KAMITI FARMERS COMPANY LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 300–00900, KIAMBU
LOSS OF SHARE CERTIFICATE
Share Certificate No. 4134 in the name of Wanjiru Wathigo
WHEREAS Wanjiru Wathigo, of P.O. Box 69, Ngewa in the Republic of Kenya, is registered as proprietor of share Certificate No. 4134 in Mboi-Kamiti Farmers Company Limited, and whereas sufficient evidence has been adduced to show that the said share certificate issued thereof has been lost or misplaced, notice is given that after the expiry of thirty (30) days from the date hereof, a new share certificate will be issued, the original certificate detailed above will be deemed to have been cancelled, provided that no objection herein received within that period.
Dated the 7th August, 2014.
L. MAINA IRUNGU & COMPANY,
MR/5692284                               Advocates for Wanjiru Wathigo.

						
				Page: 2224GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5831
MBOI-KAMITI FARMERS COMPANY LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 300–00900, KIAMBU
LOSS OF SHARE CERTIFICATE
Share Certificate No. 6329 in the name of S. Njathi Kiarie.
WHEREAS S. Njathi Kiarie, of P.O. Box 48, Kiambu in the Republic of Kenya, is registered as proprietor of share Certificate No. 6329 in Mboi-Kamiti Farmers Company Limited, and whereas sufficient evidence has been adduced to show that the said share certificate issued thereof has been lost, notice is given that after the expiry of thirty (30) days from the date hereof, a new share certificate will be issued by the said company to S. Njathi Kiarie.
Dated the 25th July, 2014.
NAIKUNI NGAAH & MIENCHA COMPANY,
MR/5692178                                  Advocates for S. Njathi Kiarie.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5833
CORPORATE INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 34172, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. CL/20/17809 in the name and on the life of Kennedy Nyaga Mutembei.
APPLICATION has been made to this company for the issuance of duplicate of the above numbered policy, the original having been reported as lost or misplaced. Notice is given that unless objection is lodged to the contrary at the office of the company within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, which will be the sole evidence of the contract.
Dated the 6th August, 2014.
JOAN NJUKI,
MR/5692256           Life Manager.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5834
CORPORATE INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 34172, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. CL/20/11479 in the name and on the life of Charles Ageri Bwire.
APPLICATION has been made to this company for the issuance of duplicate of the above numbered policy, the original having been reported as lost or misplaced. Notice is given that unless objection is lodged to the contrary at the office of the company within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, which will be the sole evidence of the contract.
Dated the 6th August, 2014.
JOAN NJUKI,
MR/5692256           Life Manager.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5832
CORPORATE INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 34172, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. CL/20/6259 in the name and on the life of Martin Mburu Nyoike.
APPLICATION has been made to this company for the issuance of duplicate of the above numbered policy, the original having been reported as lost or misplaced. Notice is given that unless objection is lodged to the contrary at the office of the company within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, which will be the sole evidence of the contract.
Dated the 6th August, 2014.
JOAN NJUKI,
MR/5692256                                                           Life Manager.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5835
CORPORATE INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 34172, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. CL/12/6994 in the name and on the life of Benetta Nthenya Kavisa.
APPLICATION has been made to this company for the issue of APPLICATION has been made to this company for the issuance of duplicate of the above numbered policy, the original having been reported as lost or misplaced. Notice is given that unless objection is lodged to the contrary at the office of the company within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, which will be the sole evidence of the contract.
Dated the 6th August, 2014.
JOAN NJUKI,
MR/5692256                                                           Life Manager.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5836
MADISON INSURANCE
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 47382–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. SMI 463961 in the name of Brutus Omondi Debe, of P.O. Box 95350, Mombasa.
NOTICE is given that evidence of loss or destruction of the above policy documents has been submitted to the company and any person in possession of the policy documents or claiming to have interest therein should be communicated within thirty days (30) by registered post with the company, failing any such communication certified copies of the policies which shall be the sole evidence of the contracts will be issued.
Dated the 4th August, 2014.
JOSEPHAT MUTHWII,
MR/5692217                                     Underwriting Manager, Life.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5837
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 8114533 in the name and on the life of Carl Jarvis Omondi.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5838
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 8120015 in the name and on the life of Sardina Wanja Njuguna.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5839
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 6967003 in the name and on the life of Joy Wamboi Kibere.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2225GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5840
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 6963524 in the name and on the life of Beverley Wanjira Nguah.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063           Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life

						
				Page: 2226GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5841
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 6994408 in the name and on the life of Daisy Nyaboke.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2226GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5842
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 8120914 in the name and on the life of Simon Kibe Chege.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2226GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5843
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 8117886 in the name and on the life of Mathia Mulelo Mutua.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2226GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5844
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 6957586 in the name and on the life of Tevin Nyariki.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063           Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2226GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5845
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 3598109 in the name and on the life of John Njoroge Kabuba.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 23rd July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692063                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2226GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5846
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 6953142 in the name and on the life of Edward Guda Osewe.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692166                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2226GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5847
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 4603155 in the name and on the life of Alexander Peter Kariithi.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692166                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2226GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5848
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 8144022 in the name and on the life of Edla Atieno Muga.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692166                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2227GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5849
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 6983081 in the name and on the life of Andrew Mwenda Mbatiah
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692166                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2227GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5850
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 7000667 in the name and on the life of Grace Micere Mambo.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692166                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2227GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5851
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 3574975 in the name and on the life of Helen Winifred Bila.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692166                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2227GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5852
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 3576418 in the name and on the life of Ajay Kumar Patel.
APPLICATION having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692166           Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2227GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5853
CFC LIFE ASSURANCE LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30364–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICIES
Policy No. 8136192 in the name and on the life of George Waweru Njuguna and Policy No. 8145047 in the name and on the life of Jackson Njuguna Waweru.
APPLICATIONS having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policies, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to CfC Life Assurance Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policies will be issued, and shall be used as the only valid documents by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 31st July, 2014.
ROSELYNE KHAMALA,
MR/5692166                  Ag. Head of Customer Service, CFC Life.

						
				Page: 2227GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5854
BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY (K) LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30375–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 161–21935 in the name and on the life of Waita Neema Mwikali.
REPORT having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to British American Insurance Company (K) Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, a duplicate policy will be issued and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 7th August, 2014.
J. K. MITEI,
MR/5692160                                     Underwriting Manager, Life.

						
				Page: 2227GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5855
BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY (K) LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30375–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 162–760 in the name and on the life of Arodi Irene Akoth Muriuki.
REPORT having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to British American Insurance Company (K) Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, a duplicate policy will be issued and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 7th August, 2014.
J. K. MITEI,
MR/5692160                                     Underwriting Manager, Life.

						
				Page: 2227GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5856
BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY (K) LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30375–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 122–9553 in the name and on the life of George Karanja Thiru.
REPORT having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to British American Insurance Company (K) Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, a duplicate policy will be issued and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 7th August, 2014.
J. K. MITEI,
MR/5692160                                     Underwriting Manager, Life.

						
				Page: 2228GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5857
BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY (K) LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30375–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 163–2502 in the name and on the life of Anne Kariuki.
REPORT having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to British American Insurance Company (K) Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, a duplicate policy will be issued and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 7th August, 2014.
J. K. MITEI,
MR/5692160                                     Underwriting Manager, Life.

						
				Page: 2228GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5858
BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY (K) LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30375–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 122–20929 in the name and on the life of Rukia Athman Suleiman.
REPORT having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to British American Insurance Company (K) Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, a duplicate policy will be issued and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 7th August, 2014.
J. K. MITEI,
MR/5692160                                     Underwriting Manager, Life.

						
				Page: 2228GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5859
BRITISH AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY (K) LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30375–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 160–699 in the name and on the life of Joshua Kalunge Mambao.
REPORT having been made to this company on the loss of the above numbered policy, notice is given that unless objection is lodged to British American Insurance Company (K) Limited within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, a duplicate policy will be issued and shall be used as the only valid document by the company for all future transactions.
Dated the 7th August, 2014.
J. K. MITEI,
MR/5692160           Underwriting Manager, Life.

						
				Page: 2228GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5860
OLD MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED
(INCORPORATED IN KENYA)
HEAD OFFICE: P.O. BOX 30059–00100, NAIROBI
LOSS OF POLICY
Policy No. 37006457 in the name of Brenda Khayundi Bwali.
APPLICATION has been made to this company for the issuance of duplicate of the above numbered policy, the original having been reported as lost or misplaced. Notice is given that unless objection is lodged to the contrary at the office of the company within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, duplicate policy will be issued, which will be the sole evidence of the contract.
Dated the 27th May, 2014.
DAVID KOIGI,
MR/5692195                                                         Officer, Claims.

						
				Page: 2228GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5861
CHANGE OF NAME
NOTICE is given that by a deed poll dated 24th February, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi as Presentation No. 689, in Volume DI, Folio 107/1629, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Aloice Obunga Ogada, of P.O. Box 4571, Kisumu in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as Aloice Onoka Ogada, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of her former name Aloice Onoka Ogada, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Aloice Obunga Ogada, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address him by his assumed name Aloice Obunga Ogada only.
M/S YANO & COMPANY,
Advocates for Aloice Obunga Ogada,
MR/5692268                  formerly known as Aloice Onoka Ogada.

						
				Page: 2228 GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5862
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 3rd March, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 1667, in Volume D1, Folio 120/852, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Kuria Gatara Ndati, of P.O. Box 44, Kangema in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as John Peter Kuria Gatere, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of his former name John Peter Kuria Gatere, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Kuria Gatara Ndati, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address him by his assumed name Kuria Gatara Ndati only.
Dated the 24th June, 2014.
C. W. NJUGUNA & COMPANY,
Advocates for Kuria Gatara Ndati,
MR/5692264             formerly known as John Peter Kuria Gatere.

						
				Page: 2228GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5863
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 10th July, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 3451, in Volume D1, Folio 164/2482, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Ruqayyah Angela Munanie Musyoki, of P.O. Box 4431–00200, Nairobi in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as Angela Munanie Musyoki, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of her former name Angela Munanie Musyoki, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Ruqayyah Angela Munanie Musyoki, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address her by her assumed name Ruqayyah Angela Munanie Musyoki only.
Dated the 6th August, 2014.
Webale B. & ASSOCIATES,
Advocates for Ruqayyah Angela Munanie Musyoki,
MR/5692251           formerly known as Angela Munanie Musyoki.

						
				Page: 2228GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5864
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 7th April, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 1672, in Volume D1, Folio 147/227, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Lucy Njeri Mugambi, of P.O. Box 2827–60100, Embu in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as Lucy Ruguru Mugambi and alias Lucy Ruguru Njeri, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of her former name Lucy Ruguru Mugambi and alias Lucy Ruguru Njeri, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Lucy Njeri Mugambi, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address her by her assumed name Lucy Njeri Mugambi only.
Dated the 7th April, 2014.
MUTHONI NDEKE & COMPANY,
Advocates for Lucy Njeri Mugambi,
                            formerly known as Lucy Ruguru Mugambi alias 
MR/5692126                                                   Lucy Ruguru Njeri.

						
				Page: 2229GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5865
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 17th April, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 2142, in Volume D1, Folio 149/2296, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Lucy Wanjiru Nyambu, c/o James Mwangi, of P.O. Box 79062–00400, Nairobi in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as Lucy Wanjiru Thuku, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of her former name Lucy Wanjiru Thuku, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Lucy Wanjiru Nyambu, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address her by her assumed name Lucy Wanjiru Nyambu only.
ASIEMA & COmpany,
Advocates for Lucy Wanjiru Nyambu,
MR/5692113                   formerly known as Lucy Wanjiru Thuku.

						
				Page: 2229GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5866
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 3rd April, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 649, in Volume D1, Folio 71/1103, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Clive  Mutunga Muia, formerly known as Clive Mutunga Julius, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of his former name Clive Mutunga Julius, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Clive  Mutunga Muia, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address him by his assumed name Clive  Mutunga Muia only.
Dated 6th June, 2014.
sichangi partners,
Advocates for Clive Mutunga Muia,
MR/5692131                  formerly known as Clive Mutunga Julius.

						
				Page: 2229GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5868
CHANGE OF NAME
NOTICE is given that by a deed poll dated 10th February, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Mombasa, as Presentation No. 160, in Volume B-I3, Folio 1080/7638, File No. 1637, by our client, Thoya Chengo Charo, formerly known as Thoya Baya alias Chengo Charo Kaingu, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of my former name Thoya Baya alias Chengo Charo Kaingu, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Thoya Chengo Charo, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address me by my assumed name Thoya Chengo Charo only.
Dated the 18th March, 2014.
OBARA & OBARA,
Advocates for Thoya Chengo Charo,
           formerly known as Thoya Baya 
MR/5692149   alias Chengo Charo Kaingu.

						
				Page: 2229GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5867
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 21st May, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 1120, in Volume D1, Folio 144/2208, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Angeline Wanja Mwangi, of P.O. Box 545–00502, Nairobi in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as Mary Angeline Wanja Mwangi, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of her former name Mary Angeline Wanja Mwangi, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Angeline Wanja Mwangi, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address her by her assumed name Angeline Wanja Mwangi only.
Dated the 13th August, 2014.
MAHIDA & MAINA COmpany,
Advocates for Angeline Wanja Mwangi,
MR/5692314    formerly known as Mary Angeline Wanja Mwangi.

						
				Page: 2229GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5869
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 24th June, 2013, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 3133, in Volume D1, Folio 162/2462, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Greigg Franklin, of P.O. Box 12337–00100, Nairobi in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as Franklin Greigg Otieno, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of his former name Franklin Greigg Otieno, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Franklin Greigg, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address him by his assumed name Greigg Franklin only.
Dated the 12th August, 2014.
OWAGA & ASSOCIATES,
Advocates for Franklin Greigg,
MR/5692143              formerly known as Franklin Greigg Otieno.

						
				Page: 2229GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5870
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 20th March, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 2481, in Volume D1, Folio 152/2338, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Mohamed Rashid Barre, of P.O. Box 313–00610, Nairobi in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as Noor Mohamed Abdullahi, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of his former name Noor Mohamed Abdullahi, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Mohamed Rashid Barre, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address him by his assumed name Mohamed Rashid Barre only.
Dated the 13th August, 2014.
BENEDICT ODHIAMBO OLOO & company,
Advocate for Mohamed Rashid Barre,
MR/5692323          formerly known as Noor Mohamed Abdullahi.

						
				Page: 2229GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5871
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 22nd May, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 2527, in Volume D1, Folio 152/2339, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Mike Topps Opiyo, of P.O. Box 64720–00620, Nairobi in the Republic of Kenya, formerly known as Mike Top Hut Onyino Opiyo, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of his former name Mike Top Hut Onyino Opiyo, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Mike Topps Opiyo, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address him by his assumed name Mike Topps Opiyo only.
PRESTON KYALLO,
MR/5692325                                 for P. K. Kivuva & Associates.

						
				Page: 2229GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5872
CHANGE OF NAME
Notice is given that by a deed poll dated 1st August, 2014, duly executed and registered in the Registry of Documents at Nairobi, as Presentation No. 22, in Volume D1, Folio 180/2730, File No. MMXIV, by our client, Anthony Joseph D’Souza, of passport No. A1878869, Nairobi in the Republic of Kenya,  formerly known as Antonio Jose de Souza alias Anthony Joseph D’Souza, formally and absolutely renounced and abandoned the use of his former name Antonio Jose de Souza, and in lieu thereof assumed and adopted the name Anthony Joseph D’Souza, for all purposes and authorizes and requests all persons at all times to designate, describe and address him by his assumed name Anthony Joseph D’Souza only.
BETTY RASHID & company,
Advocates for Anthony Joseph D’Souza,
MR/5748502               formerly known as Antonio Jose de Souza.

						
				Page: 2230NOW ON SALE
ECONOMIC SURVEY, 2011
Price: KSh. 1,000
––––––––
THE FINANCE BILL, 2014
Price: KSh. 235
––––––––
2011/2012
ESTIMATES OF RECURRENT EXPENDITURE
OF THE
GOVERNMENT OF KENYA
FOR THE YEAR ENDING
30TH JUNE, 2011
VOL. I
Price: KSh. 1,400
VOL. II
Price: KSh. 1,200
VOL. III
Price: KSh. 1,100
––––––––
2011/2012
ESTIMATES OF DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE
OF THE
GOVERNMENT OF KENYA
FOR YEAR ENDING
30TH JUNE, 2011
VOL. I
Price: KSh. 1,100
VOL. II
Price: KSh. 1,100
––––––––
THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES AND COUNTY ASSEMBLY WARDS ORDER, 2012
Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 13
(Legal Notice No. 14 of 2012)
Price: KSh. 880
––––––––
STATISTICAL ABSTRACT, 2011
Price: KSh. 1,000
––––––––
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
Price: KSh. 250
––––––––
 
 
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS TO THE KENYA GAZETTE
For further Information contact: The Government Printer, P.O. Box 30128-00100, Nairobi, Tel. 317840/41/57/86/87.
THE following notes are for the guidance of persons submitting “copy” for inclusion in the Kenya Gazette, Supplement, etc.:
(1)       The Kenya Gazette contains Notices of a general nature which do not affect legislation. They are, therefore, submitted to the Government Printer directly.
(2)       Legislative Supplement contains Rules and Regulations which are issued by the Central Government. Because of this, they must be submitted to the Government Printer through the office of the Attorney-General.
(3)       Bill Supplement contains Bills which are for introduction in the National Assembly.
(4)       Act Supplement contains Acts passed by the National Assembly.
All “copy” submitted for publication should be prepared on one side of an A4 sheet no matter how small the Notice is, each page being numbered and should be typewritten with double spacing. Copy should be clear, legible and contain no alterations.
Particular attention should be paid to the following points:
(i)        Signature must be supported by rubber-stamping or typing the name of the signatory in capital letters.
(iiust be correct and filled in where necessary.
(iii)     Care should be taken to ensure that all headings to Notices and references to legislation are up to date and conform with the Revised Edition of the Laws of Kenya.
Extract from the Code of Regulations, Section D—
Kenya Gazette
“D 34. (1) Communications for the Kenya Gazette should reach the Government Printer not later than 9 a.m. on Friday of the week before publication is desired. The Government Printer will not publish communications received after that hour until the next subsequent issue of the Gazette.
(2) Ministries will be required to pay for the Kenya Gazette and to meet the cost of advertising in it.
It is emphasized that these notes are for guidance only, but it is requested that persons submitting copy for publication first satisfy themselves that such copy is complete in every respect.
 
 
SUBSCRIPTION AND ADVERTISEMENT CHARGES
With effect from 1st July, 2012, subscription and advertisement fee for the Kenya Gazette are as follows:
Subscription Charges:
                                                                                                                            KSh.     cts.
Annual Subscription (excluding postage in Kenya)..........................        13,920   00
Annual Subscription (including postage in Kenya)..........................        16,935   00
Annual Subscription (overseas)..............................................................        32,015   00
Half-year Subscription (excluding postage in Kenya)......................          6,960   00
Half-year Subscription (including postage in Kenya).......................          8,470   00
Half-year Subscription (overseas)...........................................................        16,010   00
Single copy without supplements...........................................................                60   00
Gazetted Supplement Charges—Per Copy:                                               Postage in
                                                                                                                                         E.A
                                                                                                             KSh. cts           KSh.  cts.
Up to 2 pages.................................................................................    15   00               60   00
Up to 4 pages.................................................................................    25   00               60   00
Up to 8 pages.................................................................................    40   00               60   00
Up to 12 pages...............................................................................    60   00               60   00
Up to 16 pages...............................................................................    80   00               60   00
Up to 20 pages...............................................................................    95   00             155   00
Up to 24 pages............................................................................... 110   00             115   00
Up to 32 pages............................................................................... 145   00             115   00



depending
on weight



 
Up to 36 pages............................................................................... 165   00
Up to 40 pages............................................................................... 180   00
Each additional 4 pages or part thereof..................................    20   00
Advertisement Charges:                                                                                   KSh.     cts.
Full page..............................................................................................................    27,840   00
Full single column...........................................................................................    13,920   00
Three-quarter column......................................................................................    10,440   00
Half column.......................................................................................................      6,960   00
Quarter column or less....................................................................................      3,480   00
Subscribers and advertisers are advised to remit payments by bankers cheques, postal orders or money orders drawn in favour of “Government Printers”.
Revenue stamps cannot be accepted. Subscriptions and advertisement charges are paid in advance.
S. N. MIGWI,
Ag. Government Printer.

			  
