
				Page: 2223GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5825
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED EXCAVATION, LEVELING AND BACKFILLING OF A YARD AREA ON PLOT L.R. NO. MOMBASA/BLOCK XLVII/173 IN LIWATONI AREA OF MOMBASA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Marine Contractors (EPZ) Limited) proposes to set up a yard area on Plot L.R. No. Mombasa/Block XLVII/173 in Liwatoni area of Mombasa County. The project shall entail excavation, leveling and backfilling of the yard, use the excavated soil material to backfill the seafront area of the yard, effectively reclaiming an area measuring 0.5 acres.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Vegetation removal


Obtain authority from Kenya Forest Service to fell the trees on site.
Re-establish vegetation cover through landscaping of unpaved areas at the completion of leveling including replanting of neem trees and or casuarinas Spp.


Noise pollution


Use serviceable machinery for excavations
The topography of the area favors dispersal of noise seaward as opposed to landward.
Personnel working at the site will be provided with Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) such as earmuffs.
Comply with the Noise Regulations (Legal Notice No. 61 of 2009) at all times.


Solid wastes


Deploy a NEMA licensed waste handler
Comply with the waste management regulations


Health and Safety of workers


Provision of adequate and appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) including safety shoes, helmets, gloves, and overalls.
Employees to be given the correct tools and equipments for the jobs assigned.
Employees to be trained in the use of all equipment that they will be required to operate.
Rest times and breaks will be observed.
First aid services and an emergency vehicle to be readily available at site.
Moving parts of machines and sharp surfaces to be securely protected with guards to avoid unnecessary contacts and injuries during construction phase.
The contractor to implement the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act. No. 15 of 2007.


Water quality degradation


Use of course gravel and rock boulders from the excavation process rather than fine material for creation of bunds and backfilling.
Slowing down the tipping processes and funneling backfilling materials
Undertake construction of bunds and backfilling during low tides.
The construction of the bunds can be particularly planned to coincide with the spring low tides.
Use French drains and underground piping to ensure continued flow of fresh water into the creek area.
Decrease time frame over which the backfilling operation is to take place, to avoid the daily re-suspension of sediments.
Ameliorate the impacts of the daily re-suspension of sediments by the sanctioning of sediments that have resettled.


Impact on Marine life


Ensure that reclamation activities are conducted during the low tides to minimize impact on sea dwelling organisms.
Develop and implement a monitoring programme for marine life forms to determine resilience upon completion of the reclamation activities and seek the cooperation of Kenya Marine and Fisheries Institute (KMFRI) in this regard.
The rapid undertaking of the overall dredging operation to conceptually decrease the severity and range of impacts in space and time.
 


Tidal prism change


Reduce the gradient of the slopes of the bund used in reclamation.
Continually monitor the tidal regime change of the creek.
Restore ancient adjacent reclaimed and filled areas of the creek, which are not in use as constructed areas, into salt marshes in order to compensate the loss of tidal prism and the surface of intertidal areas.
Monitor the stability of adjacent properties regarding renewed tidal erosion and provide sufficient and suitable embankments.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5748526         National Environment Management Authority.

