
				Page: 142GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  322
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON DRAFT STRATEGIC  ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED NORTHLANDS MASTER PLAN IN RUIRU, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulations 42 and 43 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations of 2003, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) has received a Draft Strategic Environmental Assessment Report for the proposed Northlands Master Plan in Ruiru, Kiambu County. The SEA findings are also expected to integrate the existing sectoral plans and programs to establish sustainable economic zone development mechanisms.
Integer Limited is the plan owner.  The proposed Northland Master Plan is set on a parcel of land located in Ruiru Municipality, Kiambu County. The master plan is comprised of various proposed land uses including residential (3,570 acres), Educational uses (86 acres), Commercial uses (390 acres), Industrial uses (695 acres), Recreational uses (1,697 acres), Ranching and Wildlife conservation zone (5,156 acres) and other public uses (232 acres). 
The specific objectives for this SEA Study are:
To assess whether the Northlands Master Plan  has properly integrated the existing national environmental policies and legal frameworks;
To assess the level of integration of the Northlands Master Plan with other relevant plans and strategies;
To evaluate whether the proposed activities in the Northlands Master Plan are compliant with the EMCA 1999 and its subsidiary legislation;
To identify, describe and assess the likely significant environmental effects of implementing the plan;
To integrate stakeholders’ socio-economic and environmental perspectives into the proposed land use plan;
To provide information to better integrate environmental considerations into decisions, implementation, and monitoring in order to minimize risks to the plan and risks emanating from the plan;
To assess alternatives and options that can improve the land use plan; and
To provide strategic-level recommendations on how to minimize potential negative effects and optimize positive effects.
The key potential impacts and recommendations are highlighted below:

Category 


Potential impact


Recommendations


Biological Impacts


Biodiversity, flora and fauna
Ensure the conservation and where possible enhancement of important habitats and species.
Development and land use planning
Ensure that land uses are sustainable and compatible with local development plans
Reduce the level of negative visual impact through the use of green infrastructure.
Energy and supply
Ensure the conservative use  of available energy resources.
Ensure that renewable energy opportunities are identified and harnessed.
Water supply and sanitation
Ensure the protection and improvement of the surface and groundwater environment in terms of water quality and quantity, for the benefit of the human and/or natural environment.
Ensure the disposal of effluent in an environmentally friendly manner.
Solid waste management
Ensure the reduction in solid waste generation
Ensure the proper handling and disposal of generated waste.
Traffic and transport
Mitigation of negative impacts from increase in vehicular traffic.
Destruction of biodiversity held in sacred groves and undisturbed bush lands
Preservation of highly prioritised reservoir of biodiversity.
Reforestation .
Introduction of invasive/alien species in construction materials
Screening of original sites of materials.
Alterations of the physical landscape
Identification and preservation of aesthetic areas.
Create buffer zone.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Economic Impacts


Micro/macro scale economy
Ensure the enhancement/protection of important new and existing material assets and infrastructure in the area.
Ensure the enhancement of economic benefits of the plan to the surrounding community.

 

Social Impacts


Human health and safety
Ensure the improvement/enhancement of the health and well being of the surrounding communities.
Community integration
Ensure integration of the in-coming community with the host community through initiatives such as information sharing, joint activities/programmes and sharing of resources/facilities.

 
 
 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(b) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8448720         National Environment Management Authority.

