
				Page: 104GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  235
THE JUDICIARY
VACANCIES IN THE OFFICE OF JUDGE OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND LAND COURT—(20 POSTS)
PURSUANT to section 3, First Schedule of the Judicial Service Act, 2011, the Judiciary declares twenty (20) vacancies in the Office of Judge of the Environment and Land Court.
Job details:
Ref:                          V/No.1/2016.
Terms of Service:      As per the Constitution.
Period of Service:    Retirement at the age of 70 years with an option to retire upon attaining the age of 65 years as per Article 167 (1) of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
Station:                    Any Environment and Land Court Station in Kenya
Functions:
A Judge of the Environment and Land Court will be overally responsible to the Chief Justice and will discharge the following functions:
(a) Have original and appellate  jurisdiction to hear and determine all disputes relating to environment and the use and occupation of, and title to, land;
(b) Hear and determine disputes relating to:
environmental planning and protection, trade, climate issues, land use planning, title, tenure, boundaries, rates, rents, valuations, mining, minerals and other natural resources;
compulsory acquisition of land;
land administration and management;
public, private and community land and contracts, choses in action or other instruments granting any enforceable interest in land; and
any other dispute relating to environment and land.
(c)  Hear and determine applications for redress of a denial, violation or infringement of, or threat to, rights or fundamental freedom relating to the environment and Land under Chapter Five of the Constitution.
(d) Exercise appellate jurisdiction over the decisions of local tribunals in respect of matters falling within the jurisdiction of the court.
(e)  Have supervisory jurisdiction over local tribunals, persons or authorities.
Constitutional and statutory requirements for appointment:
For appointment to the position of Judge of the Environment and Land Court, the applicants must possess the following qualifications:
(a) Hold a law degree from a recognized university, or be an  advocate of the High Court of Kenya, or possess an equivalent qualification in a common-law jurisdiction.
(b)  Have at least ten (10) years’ experience as a Superior Court Judge or professionally qualified Magistrate; or
(c)  Have at least ten (10) years’ experience as a distinguished academic or legal practitioner or such experience in other relevant legal field; or
(d) Have held the qualifications specified in paragraphs (b) and (c) for a period amounting, in aggregate, to ten (10) years.
Notes:
(i)   The experience may have been gained in Kenya or in any other country with a Common Law jurisdiction;
(ii) Knowledge and experience in environmental and land matters will be an added advantage;
(e)  Meet the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution and be of high moral character, integrity and impartiality. In addition, the applicants must demonstrate a high degree of professional competence, communication skills, fairness, good temperament, good judgment in both legal and life experiences and commitment to public and community service.
The appointments shall be made in accordance with Article 166 (1) (b) as read with Article 162 (2) (b) and (3) of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
Interested and qualified persons are asked to visit the Judiciary jobs portal: http://jobs.judiciary.go.ke for instructions on how to apply.
Dated the 20th January, 2016.
WILLY MUTUNGA,
Chief Justice and President of Supreme Court of Kenya.

