
				Page: 141GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  321
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PHARMACEUTICAL MANUFACTURING PLANT, OFF NAIROBI -  NAMANGA ROAD, AT ISINYA TOWNSHIP IN KAJIADO COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Skylight Chemicals Limited, is proposing a Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Plant located on plot L.R No. Kajiado/ Kipedo /2976, at Isinya Township located along Nairobi-Namanga Road in Kajiado. The main objective of the proposed project is development of a Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Plant to cater for production of Human and Animal medicinal products.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures 


Waste water
 


Ensure the waste water passes through Treatment Plant built according to KCC standard and is regularly inspected.
The proponent must connect the sewerage effluent to well secured septic tanks. The design of the sewer system should consider the estimate discharges from the plants sources and the cumulative discharge of the entire project i.e. it must have the capacity to consistently handle the loads even during peak volumes. The gradient should be sufficient to ensure and maintain maximum depth of flow.
The trunk sewer must be regularly monitored to avoid overfilling and overflowing. They must be checked regularly to monitor level of effluent.
Branches should be streamlined in the direction of flow and there should be no  junctions that would affect the flow of the effluent.
All drain pipes passing under building, driveway or parking should be of heavy duty PVC pipe be encased in 150mm concrete surround.
All waste pipes must have cleaning roding eyes accessible from outside. i.e. free to every part of the system for inspection, cleaning and repair.
All manholes on drive ways and parking areas must have heavy-duty covers set and double sealed airtight; as approved by specialists.


Energy requirements
 


Use of solar panels and generators to substitute KPLC.


Security


Install CCTV , Perimeter walling plus  an electric fence monitored by 24hr security guards.


Noise and vibration
 


Workers should be provided with relevant personal protective equipment/ materials such as earmuffs and earplugs when operating noisy machinery and when in noisy environment. These provide a physical barrier that reduces inner ear noise levels and prevent hearing loss from occurring.
Construction works should be carried out only during the specified time i.e. from 0600 hrs to 1800 hrs; when most of the neighbours will be at work.
Machineries should be maintained regularly to reduce noise resulting from friction.
No unnecessary hotting of the involved machinery and vehicles.
Use suppressors or silencers on equipment or noise shields for instance corrugated iron sheet structures.
Provision of bill boards at the construction site gates notifying of the construction activity and timings.


Fire


Install sufficient fire extinguishers and water hydrants.
Periodic Training of staff.


Waste material handling and disposal


Make sure all staff have protective gear and frequent medical examination. Ensure waste is disposed by way of an incinerator or disposed off by a registered NEMA agent.


Environment degradation


Ensure maintenance of green infrastructure planting grass and trees in all open areas.


Air quality
 


Provide Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) such as nose masks to workers on site.
Workers should go for regular health check-ups to ascertain their health standards, where dust-proof net during the construction.
Workers should be trained to understand the hazards that may be generated in such work environments.
Regular and prompt maintenance of construction machinery and equipment. This will minimize generation of noxious gases and other suspended particulate matter.
Control over areas generating dust particles. Such areas should be regularly cleaned or sprinkled with water to reduce dust. The areas can be enclosed to mitigate effects of wind on them.


Oil leaks and spills
 


All machinery must be keenly observed not to leak oils on the ground. This can be effected through regular maintenance of the machinery.
Maintenance must be carried out in a designated area (protected service bays) and where oils are completely restrained from reaching the ground. Such areas should be covered to avoid storm from carrying away oils into the soil or water systems. Waste water/ wash water from these areas should be properly disposed.
All oil products and materials should be stored in site stores or in the contractor’s yard. They should be handled appropriately to avoid spills and leaks.


Public safety, traffic, occupational health and safety (OHS)
 


The Factories Act cautions should be posted at strategic points.
Provide protective equipment depending on tasks being performed to avoid injuries and illness including working boots, overalls, helmets, goggles, ear muffs, masks and gloves etc.
Vet all food suppliers or have a cook for the project to serve clean food.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8448921         National Environment Management Authority.

