
				Page: 2658GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8373
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF  MOMBASA – NAIROBI – ADDIS ABABA ROAD CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT (MERILLE RIVER – MOYALE - A2)
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed Construction of  Mombasa – Nairobi – Addis Ababa Road Corridor Development (Merille River – Moyale - A2).
The proposed project is the upgrading to “bitumen standard” of the Merille River - Marsabit - Moyale Road (A2) extending to approx 364 kms in length, in Marsabit and Moyale Districts of Eastern Province, Republic of Kenya.
The project anticipates the following impacts and mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Soil erosion, Run-off


Design of the road’s drainage.
Stabilization of the soil along the roadside and in the road reserve.


Wildlife


The contractor(s) should develop a code of conduct to ensure that the workers do not consume game meat from the area, whether supplied by the locals or killed by themselves.
Awareness creation amongst the locals and the workers on laws that relate to wildlife hunting and consumption, and the importance of wildlife as a natural resource and heritage.
The provincial administration should be involved in creating awareness amongst the locals - that killing game is illegal and undesirable.
Empty containers and other waste should be managed carefully to avoid exposing wildlife to possible poisoning.
Intense construction activities should not be carried out at night across the Marsabit National Park, Losai Nature reserve and Dida Galgalu Important Bird Area.
Exceptional care should be taken when constructing across the elephant migration corridor such that their movements are not curtailed and workers are not exposed to risk.
During operation, a programmatic approach is proposed, where greater surveillance by KWS and involvement of communities is instituted to check possibilities for new trade in game trophies, skins and live animals.


Vegetation
 
 


Vegetation should only be cleared where it will interfere with road construction and/or present a hazard to traffic.
Within Marsabit and Moyale towns, allowance for landscaping is to be made within the construction contract, including tree planting.   
Cutting of trees, other than those mentioned above, for firewood by the workers housed in camps should be controlled.
As far as practicable, materials should not be stockpiled on vegetated areas.
In areas where soils are compacted during road construction, such as along temporary access roads, the soil should be loosened through ripping to enable infiltration of water and growth of plants.


Pollution
 


Use dust suppressants as far as possible, especially within the towns.
All the workers should wear dust masks at all times when at the sites of high dust generation.
Warn the neighbourhood of possible generation of dust beyond normal levels.


Aesthetics and landscape


Solid waste produced at camping sites for road construction crews, should be properly disposed.


Waste management
 


Construction waste and domestic waste should be stored only in the specially designated places and removed regularly. Disposal and burial of waste should be agreed upon in the established order before commencement of the works. Discharge of any non-treated drain waters and waste to the laggas or on the surrounding land should be forbidden.
Ensure that waste materials are properly disposed of to suitable locations. Partly inert waste materials (for example concrete from bridge reconstruction) may possibly be used as filling material for reconstruction of road sub-grade.
Periodic inspection of construction works helps to ensure proper handling of waste materials.
Contractors should encourage reuse and recycling to minimize residual waste.
A handling protocol, e.g. waste storage away from public view, and provision of retention areas to contain accidental spills of toxic, hazardous, and harmful construction materials, such as caustic and acidic substances, oil, waste oil, diesel, and bitumen, should be prepared and implemented by the contractors.


Health and safety
 
 
 


Road construction workers should be informed about diseases that are prevalent in the project area, and how they can minimize their exposure and transmission.
Mount regular HIV-AIDS awareness campaigns.
The Contractors should consider hiring a permanent nurse to attend to emergencies and to mount awareness campaigns amongst the workers.  
MOR will also have to regularly discuss with their counterparts any health implications of on-going road construction.
Access roads for haulage trucks used during road construction should not be located near schools, hospitals and residential areas.
Provide warning to shop owners and other commercial businesses close to the road (especially in Marsabit and Moyale) at least two weeks before use of heavy equipment near their premises.
Install appropriate signs at road diversions.


Noise and vibration
 


Minimize noise, especially noise from heavy equipment when constructing the road through Marsabit and Moyale towns.
Special care should be taken where the construction site is near to sensitive receptors such as schools and hospitals (Most sensitive sites – Laisamis, Logologo, Marsabit, Bubisa, Turbi and Moyale).
Heavy vehicles should not be used at night near populated areas (Marsabit and Moyale).
Ensure that construction equipment is operating optimally and with operational noise mufflers where possible.


Quarry and borrow areas


Absolute care is needed when using explosives as they can adversely affect the workers and wildlife in the area.


Urbanization


Proactive planning by the District and Provincial Physical Planners.
Provide roadside amenities, preferably as a component of the road construction project.


Road safety issues


Design and construction of rumble strips, speed bumps and erection of appropriate warning signs.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Eastern Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Marsabit District.
(e)  District Environment Officer, Moyale District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
O. Z. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR7362472          National Environment Management Authority.

