
				Page: 2659GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8374
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED MOMBASA BY-PASS ROAD STUDY IN MOMBASA DISTRICT
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed Mombasa bypass road study.
The proposed project entails:
Construction of Bypass from Miritini Township to Ngombeni in Likoni with shoulders of 2.5m, 2 carriageways of 7.0m, internal shoulder of 2.0m and an overall road width of 23m
Construction two viaduct bridges over the ocean at Mkupe (Mwache bridge) and Dongo Kundu (Mteza Bridge). Mwache bridge is 495m, entirely across water while Mteza Bridge is 1,360m of which 760m is across mangrove and mud flats, and 600m across water.
Widening and improvement of Barack Obama Road
Widening and improvement of Port Reitz Road
Widening and improvement of Magongo Road
Widening and improvement of Mombasa Western Relief Road
Construction of a four lane bridge over railway connecting to Lumumba road
Construction an underpass structure at Miritini railway crossing
Construction of a Link Road from the Bypass to the proposed new container terminal
Construction of box culverts at underground water sources on the road to the proposed new KPA container terminal.
Construction of a bridge over low lying area on the road to the proposed new KPA container terminal.
The project was originally located mainly in Mombasa District but since new districts have been created from Mombasa, the project is well spread into newly created districts namely Kilindini, Likoni and Kinango. The Bypass passes through Kilindini, Kinango and Likoni districts.  The road to KPA container terminal is in Kilindini district, Port Reitz Area Roads are also located in Kilindini district and the Western Relief Road is located in Mombasa district.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Aquatic habitat loss/fragmentation/damage
 


Boring during bridge construction and the vibrations generated will lead to habitat loss and damage thereby leading to loss of some marine species at Mkupe and Mwangala creeks.
Soil erosion from constructed and rehabilitated sites will lead to down stream siltation ruining spawning beds for fish.
Mangrove cutting will lead to loss of breeding grounds for fish, macro benthos and other marine fauna.


Migration corridor restrictions


During construction migratory and feeding corridors for marine fauna will be interrupted at Mkupe and Mwangala creeks.


Fluctuation of physico-chemical variables
 


Fluctuations in phosphorus, ammonia, DO will lead to resultant changes in the pH in both the sediment and water column at Mkupe and Mwangala creeks thereby affecting organisms and the photosynthesis process.  The pH will also increase due to deposition of concrete materials and cement during viaduct bridge construction.
Sediments act as nitrate sinks and their disturbance will lead to eutrophycation that can lead to algal blooms and eventual effects to fish and other marine fauna.
Presence of high organic matter at Mkupe and Mwangala creek waters is an indication of high presence of micro and macro-organisms hence the disturbance will lead to loss of biodiversity.


Oil/petrol spillage
 


During construction it is anticipated that there shall be cases of oil/petrol spillage from construction equipment which will lead to effects and possible loss of fish, macro benthos, mangroves and other marine fauna and flora.


Noise from construction equipment
 


During construction noise from construction equipment will have an impact on marine life especially fish which will move away thereby interfering with its availability for local fishermen.


Impacts on air quality
 


Vehicular Emissions result from the use of fossil based fuels which when burnt release dangerous fumes and gases that will pollute the local atmosphere during construction and operation of the road.  Exposure to major emission constituents is responsible for certain human health problems.
Emissions also result in acid rain absorption of toxic pollutants that have effects on plant growth. Acidification of aquatic ecosystems has definite implications or the health of aquatic species.  On the built environment acidity originating from vehicle emissions is responsible for deterioration of paints and accelerated corrosion of metals.
Dust Generation from activities involving civil works, demolitions and quarrying generate substantial amount of dust especially during dry season. Dust may enhance upper respiratory diseases and staining of buildings and other items in the vicinity.  Dust settles on leaves of plants and can interfere with pollination and photosynthetic activities if accumulation is significant.  Dust that settles in the marine environment will have impacts on the marine fauna.


Impacts on soils/land degradation
 


Loss of Productive Soils at Miritini, Tsunza, Mwangala, Bububu and Likoni areas will be exhibited when land will be acquired for the road carriageway and right of way.
Soil Erosion will occur as the natural soil is modified by the construction process.  The possible hot spots will be the hilly and steep areas of Mkupe, near the airport fence on the road to KPA and Mwangala and Bububu areas.  Soil erosion can also have cumulative impacts far beyond the road construction affecting slopes, the ocean and some distance from the initial impact point.
Land Slides during construction due to destabilization of slopes due to creation of road cuts or embankments will result in some degree of soil disturbance.
Stockpiling of Spoil Materials can destroy vegetation hence leading to soil erosion.
Contamination of Soils will definitely be caused by accidental oil spills particularly in and around machinery and plant yards, base camps and areas of concentrated activities during construction.  During operation of the road it is expected that pollutants settling in the soils from vehicular emissions will normally be localized and minor.


Impacts on water resources
 


Spillage of oil and other pollutants, like fuel and other mechanical fluids from vehicles while at camp or in the construction field may seep into the ground water affecting ground water quality.  In addition, poor location and construction of pit latrines and septic tanks within the camps, site offices and in the construction fields may result in ground water pollution. 
Surface run-off.  During construction, site clearance and removal of topsoil along the road, access roads and diversions will increase localized surface run-off since vegetation that allows slow infiltration of water shall have been removed.  Again, where such vegetation clearance and earthworks are extensive, especially along steep gradients, sediment-loaded run-off may increase turbidity of the ocean within the project area.
After completion of works, the road design will create a modified drainage system within the vicinity of the road.  Bitumenised surface will create an artificial impermeable surface that will increase run-off.  This increased run-off may in turn increase flow volumes into the ocean beyond the normal range.
Drainage works particularly misdirected outfalls, outfalls along steep slopes or outfalls with large runoff flows can have adverse impacts through excessive erosion.  Conversely the blockage of outfalls by area residents can cause rapid deterioration of road works, which is a heavy national investment.
Surface Water Quality may be undermined due to increased erosion, run-off from roads and contamination in the event of oil spills.  The extent of this impact will depend directly on the magnitudes of the other causative factors mentioned above.  Nonetheless, bituminous activities may result in wash away of bitumen and other associated chemical materials especially under rainy conditions.  These materials may find their way into the adjacent ocean, thus affecting water quality that could adversely affect aquatic flora and fauna. 


Impacts on human health and safety
 


Disease Transmission through work crews to the population near the project area through STDs including HIV-AIDS and through unhygienic environment in the project area including poor garbage disposal and poor human waste disposal.
Water Supply Contamination through overloading of local sanitation infrastructure and spread of waterborne diseases such as amoebic dysentery, typhoid and cholera.
The possible cutting of water supply pipes during construction could lead to water contamination.  The ponding of water during construction could lead to a considerable health hazard since it provides breeding habitat for snails, flies and mosquitoes therefore creating a possibility of malaria.
Road Safety will be a major issue during construction and operation of the Bypass. The possible causes of road accidents to be addressed will be; drivers’ fault, pedestrian fault/fault of passengers, mechanical defect in vehicles, bad roads and other factors like bad weather, cattle obstruction, fallen trees, road blockage, absence of rear reflectors, road signage, non-functioning of road signals


Impacts on fishing
 


Fishing and Landing sites : Reduced fishing ground and Landing Sites during construction of the viaduct bridge will affect the fishing activities and the economic livelihood for fishermen in Mkupe, Mwangala and Port Reitz areas.
Access to fishing sites : Access paths to fishing sites will be affected during construction of the viaduct bridge.
Unavailability of fish due to construction activities : Loss of fish through oil spills, vibrations, noise, siltation as a result of soil erosion and by cutting of mangroves will affect daily fish quantities hence affecting fishermen livelihood.
Fish traders : Loss of fish through oil spills, vibrations, noise, siltation as a result of soil erosion and by cutting of mangroves will affect daily fish quantities hence affecting their business.  Some fish traders buy fish at the landing sites therefore it will be difficult for them to access these sites during construction.


Impacts on traditionally valued vegetation
 


Cutting of Mangroves will affect the breeding grounds of fish and other marine life. Local traders of Mangroves will also be affected since they depend on harvesting of mangroves for their livelihood. Locals who use the mangroves for firewood and building houses will also be affected.
Medicinal trees and shrubs Neem tree (Mwarubainne): Vegetation clearance will destroy valued trees and shrubs which have medicinal value and which are a source of energy in form of firewood. These trees and shrubs are ‘mkilifi’ and ‘mwarubaine’ that are found at Jeuri, Mkupe and Mwangala areas.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Coast Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Mombasa District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR7362472          National Environment Management Authority.

