
				Page: 2657GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8372
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED OFFICE PARK PROJECT LANGATA ROAD / NDEGE ROAD JUNCTION, KAREN PLOT L.R. NO. 28134
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed office park project
The proposed development will involve construction of Four Double Storey Office Blocks. The actual design components of the project include:-Construction of four double storey office buildings, management office cafeteria building ,driveways, sidewalks and parking bays for 496 vehicles ,generator house waste water treatment plant, central gazebo and lake, Construction & installation of development utilities and Site landscaping
The proposed project is located on L.R. No. 28134 located at the Langata Road and Ndege Road Junction, Karen, Nairobi.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


Noise and vibrations


Complying with maximum permissible noise levels for constructions sites as per Second Schedule of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and   Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009.
All transportation of construction materials are to be conducted at traffic off peak hours only and on weekdays only to avoid making noise to residents during weekends and when they are back home on weekdays.
 All noisy machinery shall be shielded by portable barriers and located as far from existing sensitive receptors as possible.


Air pollution (exhaust emissions and dust)


Provide 2.4 m high hoarding and dust screens along site boundary.
Provide Effective dust screens that shall be used on scaffolding erected around the perimeter of a buildings under construction.
Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand and other loose materials or require all trucks to maintain at least two feet of freeboard.
Pave, apply water when necessary, or apply (non-toxic) soil  stabilizers on all unpaved access roads, parking areas and  staging areas at construction site.
Use of electrically operated construction machinery to avoid externalities produced by diesel engines. This procedural change may reduce problems related to emission, idling and  maintenance.    


Degradation of natural and aesthetic environment


Ensure the design of the proposed buildings and the construction thereof avoids/retains existing mature trees/vegetation and its attendant biological diversity as much as possible.
Demarcate the project area to be affected by construction works to preserve vegetation falling outside the development paths.
Carry out appropriate landscaping programme for the revegetation and improvement of aesthetic value of parts of the project area after construction.


Health and safety impacts


Appropriate health and safety measures shall be implemented.
Warnings and signs shall be placed in appropriate places.
Safety education and training of the construction workers should be emphasized.
 Appropriate Personal Protective Gear shall be worn at all times by all within the construction site including visitors
 Install proper fire management equipments and strategies.


Waste management


Use of durable, long-lasting materials that will not need to be replaced as often, thereby reducing the amount of construction waste generated over time;
Purchase of perishable construction materials such as paints incrementally to ensure reduced spoilage of unused materials.
Use of building materials that have minimal packaging to avoid the generation of excessive packaging waste.
Segregation or sorting of waste at its source shall be practiced in order to encourage reuse/recycling.
Wastes shall be collected daily from all bins to a transfer station near the main gatehouse awaiting final collection.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Nairobi Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Westlands and Langata Districts.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
WILKISTER MAGANGI,
for Director-General,
MR7363562          National Environment Management Authority.

