
				Page: 2656GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8371
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OF A HIGH RISE BLOCK OF APARTMENTS AND MULTI CULTURAL CENTRE ON L.R. NOS.1/402 & 1/114, KINDARUMA ROAD/ROSE AVENUE, KILIMANI, NAIROBI WEST DISTRICT
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed development of a high rise block of apartments and multi-cultural centre.
The proposed apartments will be composed of a block of residential apartments (with twin tower on the upper floors) with affiliated services and a twin block multi-cultural centre. The total number of units in the whole development will be 209 Apartments (101 one bedroomed, 56 two bedroomed and 52 three bedroomed).
The proposed apartments and multi-cultural centre development will be on Plot L.R. Nos. 1/114 & 1/402 situated at the junction of Rose Avenue and Kindaruma Road, off Ngong Road in Kilimani area of Nairobi.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures.

Possible Environmental Impacts


Suggested Mitigation Measures 


Air pollution, dust generation and noise pollution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Spray  water during construction work.
Control speed and movements of construction vehicles.
Use of low-sulphur diesel for diesel-operated machinery.
Use of ear protection aids by construction workers.
No unnecessary hooting by project and occupants’ vehicles.
Install “No Hooting” signs within the blocks’ vicinity.
Restriction of construction activities to day time.
Use of equipment designed with noise control elements.
Temporarily  fencing off noisy machinery such as vibrators.


Clearing of vegetation
 
 


Planting of ornamental trees along perimeter and within site.
Where possible retain  the natural vegetation as part of the built landscape.
Planting of grassed lawns.
Establishment of flower gardens within project site.


Destruction of habitat


Discourage off-road driving
Control of earthworks.


Increased demand for water and electricity
 
 
 
 


Conservation (wise use) of water and electricity.
Use of energy saving bulbs within the apartments.
Provision of adequate water storage facilities.
Installation of rainwater harvesting structures.
Re-use of water where possible.
Inclusion of a solar lighting and water heating system to reduce on use of electricity.
As an alternative source, the proponent intends to sink a borehole ,rain water harvesting is also recommended.


Generation of solid waste
 
 
 


Re-use of  construction debris and other wastes.
Proper containment and disposal of solid waste at all project phases.
Contracting a licensed waste collection and disposal company.
Awareness raising on proper solid waste disposal.
Reuse of timber off-cuts and wooden supports for fuel.


Occupational health and safety risks
 
 
 


Proper hoarding of the site.
Use of suitable personal protective equipment (PPE).
Insurance of all workers.
Site to be sprinkled with water to minimize dust.
Use of stable ladders and other climbing/support structures.
Sensitize workers on construction safety measures.
Cleanliness and organization at the construction site.
Fencing or covering of risky areas such as deep pits.
Safety signage.
Use of permit-to-work authorizer for risky jobs.
Engagement of skilled labourers.


Fire hazards and accidents
 
 
 
 
 


Acquire fire fighting equipment.
Sensitize workers on fire safety.
No storage of inflammables at site.
Keep well stocked first aid box.
Proper handling and use of tools and machinery.
Have a trained first aider on site.


Increase in traffic flow
 
 


Adequate road warning signs to traffic regulations.
Erection of speed bumps.
Incorporation of access and deceleration lanes into the project (a traffic study should be carried out to assist in this).


Generation of waste water
 
 
 


Proper collection  and directing of waste water and connection of sewerage system to existing NCC sewer system as per approved design.
Provision  of and proper direction of storm water drains.
Proper decommissioning of waste water and sewer system.
Incorporation of absorption pits during landscaping to allow water percolation.


Pollution of surface and ground water


Proper collection and directing of waste water and connection of sewerage system to existing NCC sewer system as per approved design.
Provision of and proper direction of storm water drains.
Proper decommissioning of waste water and sewer system.
Incorporation of absorption pits during landscaping to allow water percolation.


Public health and safety


Ensure use of provided pit latrines by construction staff.
Proper handling and disposal of solid waste.
Operation of noisy machinery at daytime only.
Control of visitors to the site.
Safe decommissioning of buildings and connections thereof.
Installation of adequate water supply.
Controlled developments around the facility.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Nairobi Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Westlands and Langata Districts.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR7363735          National Environment Management Authority.

