
				Page: 2583GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8467
TASK FORCE ON IRREGULAR APPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC LAND AND THE SQUATTER PROBLEM IN ATHI RIVER DISTRICT
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Minister of State for Provincial Administration and Internal Security has appointed a Task Force consisting of the following:
John Abduba—(Chairman).
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Lands—(Secretary).
Members:
 Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Provincial Administration and Internal Security.
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Lands.
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Nairobi Metropolitan Development.
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Industrialization.
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Labour.
Town Clerk of Mavoko Municipal Council.
Regional Commissioner of Lower Eastern.
Juda Muoka.
Shamit Singh.
Bishop Nicholas Muli.
The Task Force may co-opt professional and any appropriate competence within or outside Government.
Terms of Reference:
1.  To examine and inquire into the allocations to private individuals or corporations, of public land or lands dedicated or reserved for public purposes including:
(a) Jumbo (Airport) land;
(b) Numerical Machines land;
(c) East Africa Portland Cement land;
(d) National Housing Corporation/Agriculture Syndicate land;
(e) National Social Security Fund land;
(f)  Public land around Daystar University;
(g) Margaret Wamaitha Humphrey’s land (deceased).
2.  To collect and collate evidence and information available relating to the nature, causes and extent of unlawful or irregular allocations of such lands.
3.  To prepare a list of all lands unlawfully or irregularly allocated, specifying the particulars of the lands and of the persons to whom or corporations to which they were allocated, the date of allocation, the particulars of all subsequent dealings in public land concerned and their current status.
4.  To examine payment of land rates to Mavoko Municipal Council relating to the said parcels of land.
5.  To establish the nature of involvement of public officials or any other persons in the irregular appropriations and allocation of public land and to identify the officers involved.
6.  To determine the security implications of the squarter problem in Athi River District.
7.  To carry out any other inquries which in the opinion of the Task Force is necessary in unravelling the irregular land appropriations and allocation in Athi River District.
8.  To recommend measures to restore public land irregularly allocated.
9.  To recommend actions to be taken against persons involved in the irregular land allocation in Athi River District.
10.      To examine transactions of the Land Control Boards against the background of existing legal framework on their functions and powers and explore reasons for their inability or failure or unwillingness or refusal to curtail the irregular land appropriations or allocations in the district.
11.      To recommend measures to be put in place to curb future irregular allocation of such land.
In the performance of their tasks, the Task Force shall:
Prepare detailed Work Plan indicating the milestones and time-lines.
Develop a prioritized Matrix clearly categorizing the immediate, medium and long-term reforms and budgetary requirements.
Review any documents relevant to its mandate.
Hold Consultative Forums with professionals and the public.
Reporting:
The Task Force shall report to the Minister of State for Provincial Administration and Internal Security; and
Shall regulary advise and keep the Minister appraised on progress. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, it shall make progress reports to the Minister after every fourteen (14) days.
Mode of operation:
In the performance of the duties, the Task Force shall regulate its procedure.
Quorum:
The quorum of any meeting for purpose of conducting any business other than to appoint a temporary charman shall be five excluding the chairman.
Duration:
The Task Force shall finalize its task within a period of forty-five (45) days with effect from the date of gazettement.
Any of the members other than the public officers may resign by writing to the Minister to that effect and such resignation, shall take effect upon such letter of resignation being received by the Minister.
Costs:
The costs incurred by by the Task Force, including but not restricted to facilitation and the payment of allowance in respect of the members and the secretariat of the Task Force, shall be defrayed from voted funds of the Ministry.
Dated the 15th July, 2011.
GEORGE SAITOTI,
Minister of State for Provincial
Administration and Internal Security.

