
				Page: 1209GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3406
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED DUALLING OF MOMBASA–MARIAKANI ROAD, MOMBASA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Kenya National Highway) is proposing to dual  Mombasa–Mariakani (A109) Road, Mombasa County.
The project road is approximately 41 km. and forms part of the 500 kilometres Mombasa–Nairobi Highway. The project road starts at the junction of Kenyatta Avenue (A109) and Digo Road (A14) within Mombasa City. It runs in a northerly direction through Changamwe, Miritini, Mazeras, Mariakani, before terminating at Mariakani Weighbridge. The proposed rehabilitation and expansion of Mombasa–Mariakani Road is a national flagship under the Kenya Vision 2030 and has economic benefits to the country as well as the immediate neighbouring states (Uganda, Sudan, Rwanda and to some extent Burundi). At the local level, the road expansion will address the persistent traffic congestion between Miritini and the City Centre (where at time it runs into hours) through streamlining the flow of heavy traffic.
 The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Degradation of water sources


Ensure valid permits on construction water abstraction (sources established in Kokotoni and Mwache areas).
Groundwater abstraction be on permits conditions (locations to be identified.
Ensure the public at target water sources gets priority on surface water sources.


Air quality
 


Ensure deviations and dry materials are kept damp at all times.
Extraction Materials to be under damp conditions.
Establish information flow process to the communities on dusty conditions.
Material delivery trucks to comply with established emission standards.
Undertake sampling for air quality in 4No. Pre-identified locations every 6 months for monitoring purposes.
Utilization of Non Motorized Transport provisions for public safety.


Vegetation cover degradation


Plan for landscaping and beautification for the project corridor upon project completion (all sections of the road).
Only the immediate required section of the new road sections shall be cleared of vegetation (Miritini – Mazeras sections has the highest potential for vegetation cover loss).
Undertake a tree (>12inch girth) count throughout the corridor for compensation purposes through planting (limited large trees noted but coconut trees are significant).
Plan to compensate for lost mangrove sections and other vegetation lost along the Makupa Causeway sections (lost through section expansion and removed for efficient construction works).


Waste management


Develop Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and schedules for the project works.
The contractor(s) to develop waste management plans and provide appropriate facilities for their operations.
Prepare signed agreements with landowners where spoil earth is to be disposed indicating conditions and responsibilities for restoration and management.
The spoil disposal sites should be approved by NEMA before dumping commence.
Consider re-use of used/waste asphalt concrete for public access roads in the neighbouring area.


Land use


Monitor emerging land use trends along the road during construction in liaison with planning department, Land use planning and zoning to commence during the construction phase and enforced immediately.
KeNHA would encourage the local authorities on the provisions of social amenities along the corridor in light of changing social and economic development.


Health and safety


Provide safety programmes for material sites and working areas including emergency response mechanisms.
Safety provisions (signage and lighting) for the work areas along the road corridor.
Appropriate information and warning signs shall be provided along all the deviation roads for enhanced safety.
Awareness, prevention and training on HIV/AIDS and other social diseases (KeNHA).
Provide wellness centers at:
The construction camp sites.
Adoption of pre-identified health centers within the road  corridor.
Selected sites for parking yards.

Provide group medical insurance and personal Protective Equipments (PPEs) for the construction workers and ensure application.


Road maintenance


Establish modalities for the involvement of the residents in the maintenance of the road.
Install and maintain appropriate road signs.
Collaborate on the control of roadside billboards that are a safety risks.
Maintain trash bins at strategic locations along the roads including bus stops, foot bridge landings, under pass exits.


Impacts of deviation routes
 


Confine construction traffic to the construction road reserve to the extent possible (there will be 40M corridor available).
If deviations are unavoidable, inform the road users and residents in advance seeking for co-operation.
Install appropriate signage and information (including reflective barriers and signs) on the construction road and deviations for reduced conflicts and accidents.
Maintain the deviation roads in good motorable conditions at all times for efficient traffic flow.
Deviation roads should be maintained damp for dust control at all times (the roads are within proximity of social and economic activities).


Social and economic


Enhance collaboration with communities on construction activities affecting them through established Community Liaison Committees.
Provide deviations and slip accesses to affected premises during construction throughout the corridor.
The contractor to prepare and consult on an employment plan and implement in accordance to law.
The contractor to establish and manage environmental and social initiatives to oversee mitigation measures developed under this report.  Ensure effective signage and information to road users, especially on deviations and construction sections with obstacles.
Provide safe crossings and walkways during the construction works backed up with appropriate signage.
Provision for community improvement services under social responsibility including health, education, water supply, sanitation, access roads, etc.


Provision of road reserve


All the PAPs should be identified and compensated before the project commences (RAP process undertaken).
Consider monetary options for livelihood restoration of the PAPs on the face of shortage of free land space in the project counties.
Avoid disruption of public institutions to the extent possible (schools, religious premises and health centers) – None was observed within the existing alignment.
Ensure the design of the road is confined within the reserve corridor that is already available.


Decommissioning of Construction Installations
 


Carry out decommissioning audits for the camp sites and seek approval of the decommissioning plan from NEMA.
Prepare and submit for approval by NEMA the rehabilitation and restoration plans for all materials sites used for the project (quarry sites, borrow pits and spoil dumping areas).
Rehabilitate all material sites and materials preparation yards in accordance with the approved rehabilitation plans.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7407434         National Environment Management Authority.

