
				Page: 1211GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3407
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED REHABILITATION OF THE LESSERU–KITALE–MARICH PASS ROAD (B1, A1) PROJECT IN UASIN GISHU, TRANS NZOIA AND WEST POKOT COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Kenya National Highways Authority)is proposing to The Lesseru-Kitale-Marich Pass Road (B1, A1)  in Uasin Gishu, Nzoia and West Pokot County.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Soil erosion


Construction activities have to be organized in a very efficient manner.
Soil and gravel should be shaped and compacted immediately after transport to its final destination.
Construction activities should be carried out during the beginning and or towards the end of the rainy season.
Landscape and plant vegetation on disturbed surface on completion of the construction phase of the project.
Provision of suitable storm water drainage channels to effectively discharge water safely.
Soil erosion control measures e.g. grassing; scour Checks; culverts; gabion Works and Stone pitching and cut-water Drains.


Dust/particulate matter


Watering gravel site areas and deviations and the road sections being worked on.
Fencing/restricted entry to active sites.
Off-road driving should be prevented by ensuring the road is always in motorable condition.
Creating awareness among drivers Provision of PPEs to the staff.
Development of dust management plan for construction and operation phases.
Restricting vehicle speed on unsealed road access to construction site to reduce dust.
Regular servicing of construction machinery and vehicles.
Bulk earthworks for exaction should be carried out in a controlled manner.


Noise and vibration


Construction activities to be carried out during daytime (8 a.m. to 6 p.m.).
Noise monitoring at the site and equipment to maintain/check noise emissions levels.
Use of PPEs.
Regular maintenance of equipment to keep it in good working condition.
Operators of construction equipment to be made aware of the potential noise issues and how to minimize noise emissions.


Fire and explosion hazards


Fire-fighting equipments.


Wastewater streams


Provide storm water drains.
The construction of box and pipe culverts so that the flow of water is unimpeded.
Side drains; mitre drains, and bridges required to direct road runoff.
Regular maintenance that siltation of the structures does not occur.


Energy consumption


Regular servicing of vehicles and machinery.
Switch off idle vehicles and machinery.
Use efficient energy consuming equipments.
Use energy saving bulbs in the labour camps.


Removal of vegetation


Selective removal of vegetation.
Replant some of the vegetation on completion of the construction activity.
Compensate landowners for all trees/ vegetation to be cut down.


Water consumption


Contractors to obtain water abstraction permit from WRMA.
Avoid unnecessary wastage of water during operation.
Residuals from diesel and lubricants used on site should be stored safely awaiting appropriate disposal in order to prevent migration of contaminant hydrocarbons into the site soil and water bodies.


Air pollution


Regular watering of dusty sections of the road project.
Use of PPEs e.g. dust masks.
Regular servicing of machinery and vehicles.
Buy fuel from authorized dealers.


Wasteoils and other
spillages


Proper labelling of containers for holding hazardous materials.
Servicing of machinery and equipments to be done at a designated place with a paved surface and oil interceptors.


Public and occupational safety and health


Fence off work active sites.
Use of PPEs.
Dust suppression measures.
Provide adequate location and maintenance sanitary facilities.
Camps housing to be in accordance with approved site plans.
Create awareness on HIV/AIDs and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Avail health care services.
Provide safe drinking water points; and
Control of Malaria.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Uasin Gishu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413501         National Environment Management Authority.

