
				Page: 1194GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3452
MINISTRY OF SPORTS, CULTURE AND THE ARTS
WORLD YOUTH CHAMPIONSHIPS, 2017
APPOINTMENT OF THE LOCAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE (LOC) FOR THE 2017 INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ATHLETICS FEDERATIONS (IAAF) WORLD YOUTH CHAMPIONSHIPS
1.  IT IS notified for general information that following the successful bid by Kenya to host the 2017 International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) World Youth Championships that will be held in Nairobi, the Cabinet Secretary for Sports Culture and the Arts has appointed committees to be known as the Steering Committee and the Local Organizing Committee (LOC) for the Championships consisting of:
(a) Steering Committee:
Cabinet Secretary, Sports, Culture and the Arts.
Principal Secretary, Sports, Culture and the Arts.
Deputy Governor, Nairobi County.
Secretary, Sports.
Chairman, Sports Kenya.
President, Athletics Kenya.
Chairman, National Olympic Committee of Kenya.
Chairman, Local Organizing Committee.
CEO, Local Organizing Committee.
Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA)—Carol Kariuki.
National Treasury—Eunice Kigen.
(b) Local Organizing Committee:
Chairman                                      Lt.-Gen. (Rtd.) Jackson Tuwei
Vice-Chairman                              Japhter Rugut
Vice-Chairman                              Christopher Khaemba
Chief Executive Officer                 Isaac Kamande
Head of Legal                                Jinaro Kibet
Head of ICT                                  Mwanaulu Issa
Director Technical and Competitions  David Okeyo
Assistant Director Technical         Ibrahim Hussein
Director Security                           Kiget Kipsang
Director Media and Broadcasting Chris Mutungi
Asst. Director Media and
Broadcasting                            Nahum Okwiya
Director Finance                            John Longole
Director Commercial and Marketing   Joseph Lagat
Assistant Director Commercial
and Marketing                          Sally Sia
Director Protocol and Hospitality  Kenya Defense Forces
Assistant Director Protocol and
Hospitality                                    Douglas Wakiihuri
Director Transport                        Mohammed Abdullahi
Director Accommodation              Ibrahim Halakhe
Assistant Director Accommodation    Thomas Shadrack Dudah
Director Medical and Anti-doping    Jared Okuya Nyakiba (Dr.)
Assistant Director of Medical and
Anti-doping                                   Victor Bargoria (Dr.)
Director of Volunteer                    Fatma Awale
2.  The Chairman of each committee shall chair the meetings of the committee and in their absence, the Vice-Chairman shall chair and in the absence of both, the members present shall elect a member of the committee to Chair the meeting.
3.  The functions of the Steering Committee shall be to offer the best possible organizational framework meeting international standards for hosting of the World Championships in Nairobi.
4.  In the performance of its functions the Local Organizing Committee shall, with the approval of the Cabinet Secretary, open and operate a bank account at National Bank of Kenya, Harambee Avenue.
5.  The term of office—The committees and the secretariat shall be in office with effect from 1st May, 2015 until the end of three months ninety (90) days from the end of the World Youth Championships 2017.
6.  Winding up of the event—Upon the completion of its work in accordance with governing Regulations, the committees shall:
(a)   Organize an event to express appreciation to the Government, supporters, well wishers and show appreciation to local participants;
(b)   Compile a report of the event and audited accounts to be submitted to the Cabinet Secretary responsible for Sports within three months after the conclusion of the event;
(c)    Compile and present a report of the event and audited accounts to be submitted to the IAAF within three months after the conclusion of the event; and
(d)   Surrender all outstanding assets, including credit balances in bank and moveable assets to the Cabinet Secretary for Sports, Culture and the Arts or as agreed by the Steering Committee.
7.  The Secretariat:
(a) The Secretariat of the Local Organizing Committee shall be based at a leased facility as identified. In addition the Nyayo National Stadium, Swimming Complex shall host offices for the technical, accreditation and other departments that require close proximity to the Stadium. 
(b) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the head of the secretariat and shall be responsible for carrying out the functions set out in paragraph (b), and
(i)       such number of staff as shall be deemed appropriate by the committee, who shall be recruited and/or provided by the Ministry;
(ii)     the secretariat of the Local Organizing Committee under the general direction of the Chief Executive Officer shall be responsible for;
(iii)    providing appropriate background briefing to the committee and the sub-committees;
(iv)    supervising and controlling the day to day operations of the committee and sub-committees;
(v)     preparing the committee’s report  and disseminating information deemed relevant by the committee;
(vi)    recommending the hiring of technical staff or any other such staff that may be deemed appropriate for the purpose of the committee;
(vii)  preparing the budgets and accounts of the committee and the sub-committees;
(viii) ensuring, in consultation with the Chairman of the committee and the Chairman of the finance and commercial sub-committees prudent management of all funds of the committee;
(ix)    overall co-ordination of all activities of the sub-committees;
(x)     co-ordinating the activities of the committee and in particular ensuring liaison with the Chairman of the committee and directors of the various sub-committees;
(xi)    matters relating to protocol, public relations and procuring consultancy services for the committee and the Sub-committees;
(xii)  organizing and co-ordinating travel and accommodation for members of the committee and the sub-committees;
(xiii) setting up the championships administration centre;
(xiv) communicating with IAAF and other partners in consultation with the Chairman and Athletics Kenya; and
(xv)  performing such other assignments as may be assigned from time to time by the committee in the exercise of its mandate.
8.  Funding
(a) The activities of the Local Organizing Committee (LOC) shall be funded through the regular Government Budget on grant basis.
(b) The Local Organizing Committee (LOC) may also receive grants from well wishers and sponsors to finance any of its planned activities; and
(c)  The Chief Executive Officer shall forward to the Cabinet Secretary at least once every two months a report on the expenditure of the committee.
9.  Gazette Notice No. 2930 of 2015 dated April, the 30th 2015 is revoked.
Dated the 15th May, 2015.
HASSAN WARIO ARERO,
Cabinet Secretary for Sports, Culture and the Arts.

