
				Page: 1217GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3549
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF ADDITIONAL WHITE OILS STORAGE TANKS AND ACCESSORIES AT PUMP STATION 10 (NAIROBI TERMINAL) CONTRACT NO. SU/QT/784N/13, WITHIN KPC COMPOUND IN NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Pipeline Company (KPC) Limited) is proposing to construct 4 (four). Additional product tanks and accessories at Nairobi Terminal (PS 10) to enhance its capacity to 30-days stock for the products at Pump Station 10(Nairobi Terminal) Contract No. SU/QT/784N/13, within KPC Compound in Nairobi County.
The main objective of setting up the Company (Kenya Pipeline Company (KPC) Limited) was to provide efficient, reliable, safe and cost effective means of transporting petroleum products from Mombasa to the hinterland.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
CONSTRUCTION PHASE

Environmental/social aspect


Recommended mitigation, monitoring and/ or management measure


Loss of habitat for local Birds due to vegetation clearing and conversion


The clearing of vegetation should be strictly controlled and be limited to what is absolutely necessary and will not be done indiscriminately. Diligence on the part of the Contractor and proper supervision of the workforce is important in this respect.
Consider appropriate landscaping in unpaved areas.


Air pollution


Construction materials and excavated soils should be covered during transport and storage.
Water spraying should be done around the construction sites.
The contractor should conduct workers training on management of air pollution from vehicles and machinery.
All construction machinery should be maintained and serviced in accordance with the manufacturers’ specifications.


Noise pollution


Noise levels shall be kept within acceptable limits by NEMA.
Use of ear protectors by workers when performing noisy operations.


Occupational health and safety concerns


Establish a Health and Safety Plan (HASP) to guide construction processes.
Appoint a health and safety coordinator.
Provide an emergency First aid kit on site.
Conduct mandatory safety inductions for all workers and visitors to the site.
Maintain a register of workers on site.
Provide workers with gloves, ear gears, sturdy rubber boots and overalls to protect their skin from the effects of cement.
Designate an emergency assembling point.


Solid waste generation and disposal
 


Construction waste should be managed as follows.
Provide suitable and well labelled solid waste containers.
Proper segregation of solid waste.
Install oil interceptors along the storm water drainage channels.
The use of the “3Rs” philosophy of reuse, recycle and reduce will be adopted.
Use a NEMA registered waste collector to dispose wastes.


Spillage of oil and fuel
 


Document spill prevention procedure & response plan and display at a site easily visible to staff.
Major maintenance operations to be carried out offsite.
Maintain spill response kits at the site.


Increased traffic


Schedule delivery of materials to the site during off peak hours unless an urgent situation arises where delivery is to be done during peak hours.
The contractor can use an alternative means of transport such as the railway siding behind the proposed project site.


OPERATIONAL PHASE


Vapour emissions and offensive odours


As proposed in the tank designs the tanks should be fitted with well-structured domes to ensure minimal vapour escapes from the tanks.
Automated Leak Detection System should be installed in the terminal to aid identification of leakages and stopping escaping vapour emissions.


Noise pollution


Noise levels shall be kept within acceptable limits by NEMA;
Use of ear protectors by workers when performing noisy operations.


Liquid waste (Waste water)


Waste water treatment design should include a retention facility and separator with oil skimming system.
Properly designed spill containment systems at product storage areas to minimize the volume of storm water that becomes intermingled with contaminants within the containment system.
Effluent from separator should be treated to meet the NEMA prescribed standards for waste water before discharge into public storm water drainage.
Oil separator compartments should be cleaned regularly and the sludge properly disposed off to a registered and licensed NEMA waste collector.


Contamination of soil and ground water sources in case of accidental spillages
 


Automated Leak Detection System should be installed in the terminal to aid identification of leakages and stopping escaping vapour emissions.
The contractor, should ensure that the tanks and the domes comply with API 650 in terms of assemblage of construction equipment and installation; specifically sections G.4.2.1, G.4.2.2, G.1.1 and 1.4.1 and ensure all the tanks are tested before commissioning.
Develop a comprehensive spill response action plan with other oil marketers and display it in a strategic place.
Ensure that all drainages are fitted with oil interceptors to retain any oils that will find their ways into the drainages.
Future groundwater sampling should be done to monitor and address any contamination.
Future Soil Gas Survey and sampling should be carried out periodically once the project becomes operational to ensure there is no contamination as a result of project activities.


Security risk


KPC should come up with a strategy of controlling public movement along the above mentioned public road.
Security should be boosted around the tanks especially to monitor the activities happening after the security wall fence after the proposed tanks within a radius of 500m from the project site.


Fire hazards


All permits be acquired before any welding or cutting work commences near live tanks or in areas considered to hold considerable fuel vapour.
Carry out pre-incident response planning to identify hazards, a fire’s potential to develop into a major incident and the required and available resources.
Ignition from hot work will be controlled by following established hot work permit procedures.
An integrated fire prevention plan will be drafted before “start-up” of the facilities.
Ignition from electrical equipment will be prevented by:
Following appropriate electrical standards.
Assuring that equipments are in good operating condition, properly installed and suitable for area’s electrical hazard classification.

Proper Tank spacing as part of the design to minimize fire hazard and the exposure risk to adjacent tanks, equipment, and buildings if a fire occurs as indicated in NFPA 30 Table 4.3.2.1.1 (a) and Table 4.3.2.1.1 (b).
Bund wall and floor construction and penetration joints will be leak-tight. Surfaces should be free from any cracks, discontinuities and joint failures that may allow relatively unhindered liquid trans-boundary migration. As a priority, bunds will be checked and any damage or disrepair, which may render the structure less than leak-tight, will be remedied.
Site-specific planning of firewater management and control measures should be undertaken with active participation of the local Fire and Rescue Service team.
Appropriate and portable fire extinguishers will be availed at or near places of which fires are likely to occur. The fire extinguishing systems will comply with requirements of NFPA 10 section 5.4.
Comply with NFPA 30 section 4.5.4 and 4.5.5 on Management of fire hazards and control.
Staff working at the facility will be trained in fire systems activation as well as operational procedures. This will also include fire drills.
The fire detection system will be designed and installed at the terminal during its operation to activate automatically manually or both (automatic with manual activation).
Arrangements for on-site emergency response and firefighting planning and preparations are drawn up. It will detail the following:
Actions and responsibilities of employees in reporting a fire.
Responsibilities and actions to be taken to control vapors and prevent ignition of vapors resulting from spills.
Actions and procedures to be taken in fighting fires both manually and by activation and deactivation of fixed systems.
Notification of appropriate emergency authorities.

Maintaining integrity of storage tanks and piping systems containing flammable or combustible liquids essential for prevention of fires in around tanks.
Hydrocarbon and smoke detectors should be installed and automated to act as warning systems in case of any leakages from the fuel tanks or any smoke from live fires that may trigger fire outbreaks.
Emergency contacts for hospitals, ambulances, firefighting department should be availed at strategic places.
Capacity building and public awareness should be done extensively to ensure that the workers and the public are aware on how to conduct themselves in case of a fire outbreak.


HAZARDOUS EVENTS RELATED TO TERMINAL OPERATIONS


Hazardous Event


Proposed Prevention and Mitigation Control Measures.


Major mechanical failure of tanks


Tanks should be designed to API 650.
Conduct regular maintenance and inspection Procedures.
Ensure that Tank and site fire protection facilities are always available.
Explosions only occur when ullage vapour is between LEL and UEL.
As per the project description the tanks should be as follows: 2 nos of internal floating roof vertical tank and 2 no of Dome roof vertical tank.


Tank roof failure
 


Implement an Internal floating roof with mechanical shoe seal for MSP Tank.
Provide for Foam injection system.
Provide a Fire fighting system.
Ensure regular maintenance and inspection procedures.
Tanks should have level alarms and controlled tank filling mechanisms.


Pipe failure (i.e. new piping within the terminal)


Conduct regular maintenance and inspection procedures.
Install emergency isolation valves on the new tanks.
Avail Firefighting system (including foam).
Conduct Pipelines surge study.
Ensure that the piping is designed to ASME B31.3 to resist the combined effects on internal pressure due to contents, wind loads, earthquake forces and hydrostatic test loads.


Spillage of flammable or combustible material to the bunds


Avail firefighting system (including foam).
Install an Emergency shutdown system.
Conduct Sampling and inspection procedures prior to disposing of waste bund water.


Aircraft crash


Address incident as per aviation standards in consultation with KCAA.


Strong winds earthquakes


Ensure that the tanks are designed as per API 650 to resist the combined effects on internal pressure due to contents, weight of platforms, ladders, live loads, wind loads, earthquake forces and hydrostatic test loads.
Operations should be stopped in adverse weather Conditions.


Breach of security /sabotage


Execute security measures such as fencing, CCTV, security patrols, operator / driver vigilance.
Conduct pressure tests prior to commissioning transfer.
Conduct pipe inspections prior to commissioning.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413749         National Environment Management Authority.

