
				Page: 143Gazette Notice No. 456
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED LOWER SUBUKIA CLUSTERS IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT PROJECT LOCATED IN THE MBOGOINI DIVISION MAINLY LARI, NYAMAMITHI, WASEGES AREAS ALL WHICH ARE FOUND IN SUBUKIA DISTRICT, NAKURU COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (National Irrigation Board) is proposing to put up an irrigation project in the Mbogoini Division mainly Lari, Nyamamithi, Waseges Areas all which are found in Subukia District, Nakuru County.
The  proposed scheme  will  entail  construction  of  several  facilities  necessary  for  irrigation. These include  a  reservoir  dam  in  Mihang’o  area,  rehabilitation  of  existing  Mbogoini  and Akuis intakes, storage tanks, water transmission and distribution mains, and drip irrigation system. The conveyance and distribution structures from the intake will be a closed system.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


Topography and geographical features


Avoid clearing of riparian vegetation.
Establish tree nurseries  for reforestation purposes.
Avoid  destruction  of  sensitive habitats.


Occupational health and safety


Increase HIV/AIDS awareness campaigns within the project area.
offer  counseling  services  in  liaison with existing with stakeholders in the health sector.
Ensure construction  staff  wear personal protective equipments.
Deployment of Health and safety officer on site by the contractor.
Training of worker on safety issues.
Provision of relevant warning signage.
Training of workers on safety.
Weekly sensitization of workers through tool box meetings.
Provision of first aid kits in several accessible locations.
Designation of assembly points.


Pollution


Provision of latrine accommodation for workers’ use during implementation phase.
Avoid clearing of riparian vegetation.
Apply daily water sprays to suppress dust.
Regulate speed at the construction site.
Limit number of vehicles.
Hire a licensed hazardous waste handler to collect, contain and dispose any hazardous waste.
Use of Noise mufflers.
Avoid working in the nights when most people are home and sleeping.
Avoid blasting of rocks using explosives.
Regulate traffic speed and movement.


Waste management


Proper disposal of construction waste Contractor to hire a licensed waste handler.
Training and capacity building Sensitization of the community and migrant workers.
Construction of a foot bridge downstream of the dam.
Assessment of project affected persons.


Soil erosion


Pipeline route should be rehabilitated by re-vegetating and planting grass.
Plan trees to stabilize river banks and protect intake points.
Train scheme farmers in appropriate soil conservation techniques.
Incorporate soil erosion control measures in soil prone areas in the scheme e.g. terracing, planting cover crops and practicing of on-farm tree planting in the scheme.
Embankment to be protected through planting of recommended vegetable materials.


Hydrology


Develop an irrigation schedule and ensure adherence to the schedule.
Regulate /ration irrigation water.
Encourage storm water catchments.


Water use conflicts


Ensuring equitable sharing of water in the whole basin.
Downstream Releases to be a assured through impoundment of dams.
Build cattle watering troughs at strategic points where livestock can drink water.
Develop an irrigation schedule that ensures equal water utilization by all farmers.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nakuru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
KODIA BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/6742083           National Environment Management Authority.

