
				Page: 142Gazette Notice No. 455
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RE-DEVELOPMENT OF KENOL SOUTH C SERVICE STATION ON PLOT L.R. NO. 209/6076 ALONG MUHOHO AVENUE, NAIROBI
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenol Kobil Limited) of the proposed re-development of Kenol south C service station is proposing to demolish the existing facility which is functionally smaller in capacity, and putting up a bigger, state of the art service station that will accommodate several non business activities on Plot L.R. No. 209/6076 along Muhoho Avenue, Nairobi County.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impact


Mitigation measures


Changes in hydrology/ impended drainage


Proper Installation of drainage structures.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures through proper design and maintenance.
Provide gratings to the drainage channels.
Regular checks on any sludge along drainage channels.
Visual checks of oil interceptor and drainage channels for any leakage.


Soil erosion


Control any earthworks.
Rehabilitate degraded environment to avoid siltation and wash offs.
Compact loose soils.
Landscaping.
Ensure management of excavation activities.
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures where necessary.
Proper disposal of excavated soil.


Air pollution through dust and gaseous emissions.


Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Spray water during the construction phase on the excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Engage sensitive construction workers.
Proper use of PPE.


Noise pollution


Maintain construction equipment.
Construction activities to be restricted to daytime.
Workers in the vicinity of or involved in high level noise to wear respective safety and protective gear i.e. earplugs and earmuffs.
Appropriate selection of machinery.


Oil pollution


Proper storage, handling and disposal of new oil and used oil and related wastes.
Maintain equipment to avoid leaks.
Provide oil interceptors along the drains leading from the station forecourt and offloading area.


Water resource/waste management


Management of water usage.
Recycling of water at the construction phase where possible.
Use of water conservation signs at the wash rooms and install water conserving taps.
Recycling water from car wash.
Apply for Effluent Discharge License.
Ensure use of a NEMA registered waste handler.
comply with the prevailing regulations


Contractors lay down area


Special attention should be paid to the sanitary facilities on site especially disposal of human waste.
Garbage should be disposed off in accordance with Nairobi City council requirements.


Road safety


Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles especially along Muhoho Avenue and other road links leading to the site.
Provide bill boards at the site/entrance to notify motorists about the development.


Public health and occupational safety and health


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure effective wastewater management
Provide First Aid kits on the site.
Sensitize residents/workers on environmental management.
Ensure there is no ponding to eliminate breading of mosquitoes during construction.
Workers should be trained on occupational health and safety and first Aid administration.
Train staff on Petroleum products handling.
Sensitize workers on HIV and AIDS.


Vegetation


Landscaping and planting all unpaved areas.
Planting flowers / grassing should be done just before the rains or irrigated on dry spells.


Fire safety and spill response training/ emergency response procedures (ERPs)


Enhance health and safety preparedness among stakeholders.
Put up emergency response contacts.
Put up ERP notification instructions.
Constitute an emergency response team and appropriately train it.
Put up simple instructions on how to handle fires, product spills, and other emergency incidents.


Record keeping


Data of maintenance of all station equipment including firefighting equipment.
Daily product reconciliation (stock loss control).
Staff Training records.
Incidents and accidents registers.
Weekly inspection records of oil water interceptor and drainage systems.


Fire outbreak


Install fire-fighting equipment as provided by OSH Act.
Sensitize the residents on fire risks i.e. conduct regular fire drills.
Adapt effective emergency response plans.
Provide emergency contact numbers and contacts of mutual aid at strategic points.


Security


Provide security guards and facilities during construction and operation phase.
Security guards should always be available to alleviate cases of arson, robbery or trespass.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/67244405         National Environment Management Authority.

