
				Page: 1282GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3348
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL STATION ON PLOT L.R NO. NAIVASHA PLOT 396/71 (PREVIOUSLY 396/28) ON MOI SOUTH LAKE ROAD,     NAIVASHA MUNICIPALITY OF NAKURU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Naivasha Health Park Limited) is proposing to construct a service station on plot L.R No. Naivasha Plot 396/71 (Previously 396/28) on Moi South Lake Road,     Naivasha Municipality of Nakuru County
The actual design components of the proposed Project include: Construction of a Petrol Station structure,construction of 12no. shops,construction of 74 Parking lots,a car wash, a Lube bay, tyre centre, convenience store, landscaped court, Sewage treatment plant,development of utilities (water, drainage, electricity etc).
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Solid waste generation


Provide solid waste handling facilities such as waste bins and skips
Ensure that solid waste generated at the development is regularly disposed of appropriately at authorized dumping sites
Donate redundant but serviceable equipment to charities ad institutions


Sewage management


Provide adequate and safe means handling sewage generated at the Hotel


Energy consumption


Switch off electrical equipment, appliances and lights when not being used
Install occupation sensing lighting at various locations such as storage areas which are not in use all the time
Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points within the proposed development instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy
Monitor energy use during the operation of the project and set targets for efficient energy use
Sensitize the occupants to use energy efficiently


Air/Dust Pollution


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers
Sprinkle water on graded access routes each day to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.


Higher and Safety Risks


Implement all necessary measures to ensure health and safety of workers and the general public during operation of the Proposed Petrol Station project as stipulated in Factories and Other Places of Work Act Cap 514
Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the premises during night hours.


Run off and soil erosion


Create storm water management practices, such as piping systems or retention ponds or tanks, which can be carried over after the building is complete.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.


Noise pollution


Sensitize construction vehicle drives and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitize construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as schools, residential areas and hospitals.
Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation
Ensure that all generators and heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nakuru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/4730923              National Environment Management Authority.

