
				Page: 1280GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3346
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ON PLOTS LR NO. 29173, 7785 / 345 AND 7785 / 352 IN RUNDA, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (The Grove Limited) is proposing to develop a mixed use complex with a boutique hotel, a retail centre and office block on  L.R. Nos. 29173, 7785/345 and 7785/382 situated in Runda (Northern Bypass) in Nairobi County.
The proponent proposes to develop a commercial centre that will have a 200 bed residential hotel comprising 14,223 square meters, a retail centre comprising 5,192 square meters on two floors and a basement parking for sixty one (61) vehicles and over-ground parking for ninety two (92) vehicles with outdoor seating, a four floor office block with a total area of 14,266 square meters having 8 offices per floor and a basement parking, and over-ground parking for four hundred (400) vehicles. Total parking in the complex will be for seven hundred and thirty six (736) vehicles. The hotel and the office blocks will have lifts to cater for the upper floors.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Potential Impacts


Mitigation Measure


Construction phase


Dust


Water sprinkling of the ground.
Regular water addition to unpaved roads to be used by trucks.
Control the speed and movement of construction vehicles.


Noise


Restrict construction activities to day time hours.
Machines should be serviced to reduce on noise.


Destruction of the physical environment


Landscaping and replanting that will blend with the environment.
Levelling of soils at the end of earth works.
Proper disposal of the excavated soils.


Health and safety Hazards


Document emergency response procedures.
Use of suitable personal protective equipment (PPEs).
Use of stable ladders and other climbing/ support structures that have been  tested and approved.
Train the construction workers on safety measures.
Fencing/covering of risky areas such as deep pits.
Safety signage to be put up before commencement of works.


Contamination of water Resources by sewage


Provision of sanitary facilities for the construction staff.
Installation of adequate water supply


Increase in traffic flow


Put up adequate road traffic signage.
Temporary access from the Northern bypass.


Fire hazards and accidents


Install fire fighting facilities during both the construction and operation phases.
Sensitize workers on fire safety during all project phases.
First aid box to be kept on site as well as training on its use.
Conduct fire drills to test preparedness of staff.


Operation phase


Destruction of the physical environment


Site landscaping and planting of tree belts to prevent soil erosion and to reduce wind velocity.


Indiscriminate disposal of solid waste


Provision of adequate number of solid waste containers.
Contract a licensed solid waste transporter.


Disposal of liquid waste


Connect to the sewerage system.


Increase in traffic flow


Put up adequate road traffic signage.


Storm water


In consultation with other developers provide adequate measures to channel storm waters to storm water drains.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/4766660              National Environment Management Authority.

