
				Page: 1287GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3352
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED EXPANSION OF PEKERRA IRRIGATION SCHEME IN MARIGAT DISTRICT, BARINGO COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (National Irrigation Board) is proposing to Expand Pekerra Irrigation Scheme in Marigat District, Baringo County by developing an additional 2,000 ha of irrigated area.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Proposed Miigation Measures


Scars on landscape


Before works begins, landowners to sign contracts with the MoR which include terms and conditions of payment, the amount of land to be excavated and rehabilitation measures to be carried out.
The area to be excavated should be cordoned off, which tend to be very deep and pose a danger to livestock and children.


Soil erosion


Scour checks and gabion mattresses will be introduced in the side drains at specified intervals, depending on the gradient of the slope.
Grouted stone pitching and rock fill gabion works will be necessary to protect culvert inlets and outlets and control soil erosion.
The specified cut and fill gradients must be adhered to, and the embankments should be planted with shrubs and grasses to reduce erosion of road embankments.
Areas that have been cleared of vegetation must be planted after completion of works. Indigenous trees and shrubs should be planted along the project road.


Pits and quarries


The gravel pits and quarries will be operated as instructed by the Engineer taking into consideration the safety aspects to avoid accidents and incidents


Blasting rocks
along road reserves


It should be done during the day, and residents in the vicinity of the area being blasted should be suitably warned of blasting activities, including the time and date.


Air pollution


Dumping the gravel pit area, and occasional spraying with water along the deviation routes or earth along the road section.
Slowing the speed of traffic on deviations by using bumps and/ or clearly marked road signs may contribute to reducing dust levels.


Hydrology and
drainage


Construction of culverts so that flow in the rivers and streams is unimpeded and improved drainage along the project road through side drains.
These may be lined, and may require cascades to break the impact of water flow in them, particularly in sections with gradients greater than 4%.


 
Road safety


The area traversed by the proposed road for upgrading has a high traffic it is thus important to observe road safety through use of road signs.


Visual enhancement


A well-designed road fits in well with its surrounding because its design reflects the principles of regional landscape design. These principles can and should be applied whether or not the area being considered is one of special physical beauty


Public health


A central canteen for the workforce at the construction camp would contribute towards the general good health in the camp as kitchen wastes can be disposed of in an organized manner, while hygiene can be monitored.
Workmen should be provided with suitable protective gear.
Drainage of quarries and burrow pits to prevent them from impounding water which will act as good breeding places for mosquitoes and other disease causing vectors.
Ensuring that there are proper solid and liquid waste collection and disposal facilities.
Ensuring that clean, potable, and economical water is supplied to the populace to prevent the outbreak of waterborne diseases.
Observing high degree of cleanliness during and after construction of the project.


Rehabilitations


Gravel pits must be landscaped and reinstated or back-filled with overburden if the depth of the overburden is sufficient to allow for this.
Terracing and replacement of fencing is part of the rehabilitation process.
Contractor to plant trees to replace those that have been removed during excavation.


Awareness


All the people who live along the road will be alerted of the improvement works.
The proponent in collaboration with the District Works Officer (DWO) will be expected to disseminate information regarding the road design and upgrading works progress to all the other stakeholders along the project route

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Baringo County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/4122126              National Environment Management Authority.

