
				Page: 1288GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3464
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED EASTERN INDUSTRIAL PARK IN NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Abacus Property Consultants Limited) is proposing to establish an ultra- modern Industrial Park on LR. No.11552. in Mwihoko estate on the opposite side of River Gatharaini within Nairobi County. These will include heavy and light industries and manufacturing plants, wholesale business and distribution outlets. As the commercial area develops, more segments including banks, shopping centres, retail outlets etc. will then move into the industrial park.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Loss of environmental services


Liaise with the Nairobi County’s department of Environment on permission to fell trees Utilize open spaces maximally.
Do not remove trees unnecessarily.
Replant trees on completion of construction Carry out landscaping of open spaces Conduct landscaping.
Participate in tree planting exercises outside whenever there is opportunity.


Soil excavation/ erosion
 


Site leveling and excavation works to be planned such that a section is completed and rehabilitated while another section begins.
Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Construction of soil- galleys on sloppy sections.
Excavation material will be reused to level the site otherwise be loaded into trucks and be transported to designated disposal sites.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure to the elements.


Noise pollution and vibration
 


The noisy construction works will entirely be planned to be during day time when most of the neighbours will be at work.
Trees around the site will provide some buffer against noise propagation.
Ensure that all generators and heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.
Use well maintained machinery.
Ensure noise is not made while playing squash Ensure adequate sound proofing of the squash court.
Use of hoarding for dust control. Sprinkling of water on dusty surfaces. Adherence with the Building Code, Nairobi County by- laws and EMCA (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution Control Regulations and other applicable legislations.
Adequate warnings and cautionary safety signs Provision of appropriate personal protective equipment to workers.
Use of safe working procedures Creation of safety awareness to workers Adequate job supervision.


Air /dust pollution


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes whenever necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.


Solid and water wastes


Design and implement an appropriate landscaping programme to help in re-vegetation of parts of the project area after construction.
Reuse of the top soil in landscaping.


Air, land and water pollution and degradation


Minimize waste through accurate estimation of the sizes and quantities of materials required, order materials in the sizes and quantities they will be needed, rather than cutting them to size, or having large quantities of residual materials.
Provision of suitable facilities for wastewater disposal (such as a conservancy tank).
Ensure that the minimum statutory distance between the facilities and the river is always maintained (minimum of 6 metres).
Ensure wastes are properly disposed of.


Water pollution


Open drains connected to Nairobi County storm water drains will be provided on site.


Security


Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the premises.


Occupational health and Safety


All workers should be provide with full protective gear like working boots, overalls, helmets goggles, earmuffs, masks and gloves.
Construction crew at the site should be sensitised on social issues like drugs, alcohol and other diseases.
A fully equipped and professionally managed first aid kit must be provided within the site at all times.
The contractor should have workmen’s compensation cover to comply with Work Injury Benefit Act, as well as appropriate Ordinances, Regulations and Union Agreements.
Adequate facilities should be provided and standard cleanliness maintained.
Food handlers preparing food for the workers should be controlled and monitored to ensure that food is hygienically prepared.


water and electricity management


Avoid wasting of water supplied to the site during construction
Roof catchments should be provided to harvest rainwater to enhance collection and storage of rainwater.
In order to encourage water conservation during operation stages, the proponent should install water conserving taps that turn off automatically when not in use.
Provide notices and information signs on means and needs to conserve water resource to awaken civic consciousness regarding water usage and management
Incorporate rainwater harvesting in the project design.
Water reuse and/or recycling.
Installation of water and electricity meters.
Consider solar energy harvesting and optimize on natural lighting in the project design.
Use of energy efficient machines and appliances.
Provision of a standby generator.


Human waste management


Provide a suitable toilet for construction workers away from the river.
Ensure sewage disposal system is well maintained.


Air pollution
 


Use of low sulphur diesel for diesel vehicles and equipment.
Proper maintenance of vehicles and machinery.


Fire risks


Provision of suitable firefighting equipment Sensitize workers on fire safety.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5021547           National Environment Management Authority

