
				Page: 1296GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3469
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF A NEW KENCHIC PROCESSING PLANT THIKA, KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenchic Limited) is proposing to construct a chicken processing plant on plot LR. NO. 1428/2 along Garissa road in Ngoliba Thika, Kiambu County.
The processing plant will be divided in to the following sections; Receiving yard, Slaughtering and processing house, blast  freezers, Cold stores, Sales area, Water treatment plant, Staff canteen and kitchen, Water storage tanks, Maintenance and workshop, Rendering plant, Waste storage area, Wastewater treatment system, Staff quarters;
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Hydrology and water supply quality degradation


Hazardous substance control and emergency response plan that will include preparation for quick and safe clean up of accidental spill.
Formulate Hazardous materials handling procedures to reduce the potentials for spill during construction.
Identification of areas where refueling and vehicle maintenance activities and storage of hazardous materials, if any, shall be permitted.
Construction of a standard septic tank where all sanitary waste will be directed.
During operation phase waste water containing chicken blood may find their way in the river. The proponent will ensure that the water treatment plant to be constructed will be functional all the time. Water analysis will be conducted quarterly every year once the plant becomes operational.  


Dust and exhaust emission


Strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal protective equipment like dust masks to be provided.
Alternatively fueled construction equipment shall be used where feasible; equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Proper maintenance practices of the waste stabilization pond.
During operation fugitive emissions from leaks in the refrigeration system are possible sources of NH3 emissions. However this source is expected to be minimal. Refrigeration system will be inspected weekly to detect and repair any leakage.


Food safety impacts
 


Maintain good housekeeping and high level of hygiene.
Employ veterinary a full time doctors to test chickens before and after they have been slaughtered.
Comply with veterinary regulation concerning poultry processing.
Workers working in the plant will be required to maintain high level of personal hygiene.


Biological hazards
 


Providing workers with PPE that is appropriate for the activity (e.g. protective clothing, gloves and masks) for workers in intestine  and stomach cleaning operations.
Ensuring physical segregation of work and welfare facilities to maintain worker personal hygiene.
Designing holding areas for detained chicken and high-risk materials to avoid direct contact with workers and ensuring that all waste materials, including those from rejected chicken are removed daily.
Control movement of chicken to avoid spreading diseases.


Noise pollution and vibration


Sensitize construction vehicle drivers, machinery operators to switch off vehicle or machinery not being used.
Ensure that construction machinery is kept in good condition to reduce noise generation.
Plant trees around the site to provide some buffer against noise propagation.
Construction works shall entirely be planned to be during day time when most of the neighbors shall be away at work.
All machinery will be maintained and serviced to reduce pollution.
During operation there is high likely hood of noise coming from the chicken the proponent will plant trees around the chicken house to act as buffer against noise.


Incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences


Ensure that provisions for reporting incidents and dangerous occurrences during construction phase and operational phase using prescribed forms obtainable from DOSHS are in place.
Enforcing adherences to safety procedures and preparing contingency plan for accidental response in addition to safety education and training shall be emphasized.
Ensure that the premises are insured as per statutory requirements(Third party and workman’s compensation).
Develop efficient, clean, well-lit and adequate sanitary conveniences for construction workers.


Solid waste generation


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. recover, recycle and reuse.
Through accurate estimation of the sizes and qualities of materials required, order materials in the sizes and qualities they will be needed, rather than cutting them to size or having large quantity residual materials.
Ensure that damaged or wasted construction materials are recovered for refurbishing and use in other projects.
Donate or sell recyclables /reusable or residual materials to local community groups, institutions, and individual local residents or home owners.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure.
Use building materials that have minimal or no packaging to avoid the generation of excessive packaging waste.
Reuse packaging materials such as cartons, cement bags, empty metals and plastic containers to reduce waste at the site.
Dispose waste more responsibly by dumping at designated dumping sites or landfills only.
Waste collection bins to be provided at designated points on the site.
Running educational campaigns amongst residents, e.g. through use of posters, to encourage reuse or recycling of the solid waste.


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


Roof water to be harvested and stored to be used for cleaning proposes.
A storm water management plan that minimizes impervious area infiltration by use of recharge areas and use of detention and /or retention with graduated outlet control structure shall be designed.
Application of soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site reduce run-off velocity and increase infiltration of storm water into the soil.
Ensure those construction vehicles are restricted to existing roads to avoid soil compaction within and around the project site.


Generation of wastewater


Provision of means for handling sewerage generated by construction workers (there are toilets connected to septic tanks on the site).
Conduct regular checks for sewage pipe blockages or damages since vices can lead to release of the effluent into the land water bodies.
Construct a waste water treatment plant where waste water will be treated before it is released to the environment.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5021531              National Environment Management Authority.

