
				Page: 1264GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3389
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(NO. 17 OF 2012)
LAIKIPIA COUNTY
APPOINTMENT OF LAIKIPIA COUNTY INVESTMENT TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
PURSUANT to express and implied powers  conferred by Article 1, 10, 174, 175, 176, 183 of the Constitution as read with section 5 and 6 of the County Governments Act of 2012, the Governor of Laikipia County has constituted the Laikipia County Investment Technical Committee to prepare, plan, or do all that it pertains for an Investment conference to take place in Laikipia County.
The terms of reference for the committee include but are not limited to:
Formulate  an investment conference working plan.
(a) Source from all sources guests for the conference.
(b) Formulate and develop ways to have Investors attend and invest in Laikipia County.
(c)  plan and implement post conference activities to realise the fruits of the conference
(d) cause all proceedings, minutes, books of account, to be kept in good accessible conditions for now and future references.
(e)  do all that appertains to publicity and profiling of the county for the purposes of the conference and beyond.
2.  The Committees members and secretariat are entitled  to:
(a) A responsibility allowance for each secretariat member who is not an employee of the county government, of not more than shillings ten thousand per week.
(b) The secretariat shall be given airtime allowances on a weekly basis.
(c)  Both the technical committee members and the secretariat are entitled to tools, equipment and all facilitation to perform exceptionally towards the conference.
(d) All employees of the county government shall be entitled to allowances equivalent to their salary scales when out of their stations of work.
(e)  Those appointed from outside the county government structure, shall be entitled to allowances equivalent to job group 'L' when out of the station of work.
(f)   The steering committee shall comprise of Laikipia professionals from Diaspora.
The committee shall comprise of the following:
Committee Members:
Eliud Kimotho Waithaka
Paul Mwaniki Ndungu
James Maina Mathenge
Josephat Musili Musyima
Josiah Muriithi Thiriku
Rose Wambui Gichocho
Daniel Ndungu Thuo
Jemimah Kairuthi Mburugu
Joseph Kamiri Chege
Peter Ndirangu Hinga
Paul M. Ringera
Samuel Mwangi Njuguna
Julius Murage Kingori
Josephat Waswa
John Pamita Letai
Paul Njenga
Lantano Nabaala
Jane Putunoi
Charles Nderitu
John Gikonyo Muritu
Godfrey Odhiambo Kiche
John Melita Kamoiro
Doris Njokina Leshorono
 Susan Losike Naperit
Abdirashid Mohamed
John Bosco Akaale
Petern Ndirangu
Catherine Wambui Njoroge
Secretariat:
Lantano Nabaala—(Head of Secretariat)
Jemimah KairuthiMburugu
Susan LosikeNaperit
John Melita Kamoiro
Doris Njokina Leshorono
Josiah MuriithiThiriku
The Committee shall commence work immediately and shall do all that it takes for the realization of the investment conference.
The committee shall regulate its own procedures and operations.
JOSHUA W. IRUNGU,
MR/4766874                                      Governor, Laikipia County.

