
				Page: 1295GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3468
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED WOLFENBERG INTERNATIONAL SERVICE STATION ON LAND PARCEL  NOS. KISUMU/BUOYE/ 5304 AT BUOYE ON THE KISUMU-AHERO ROAD IN KISUMU EAST DISTRICT, KISUMU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Wolfenberg International Limited) is proposing to construct and operate a Service Station on land parcel Nos. Kisumu/Buoye/5304 at Buoye on the Kisumu-Ahero road in Kisumu east district, Kisumu County
The project activities will include; Underground storage tanks (USTs), steel storage and dispensers, offices, stores, shops and toilets, tyre sales and repair centre, generator and control rooms; a canopy covering all facilities, service bay and an oil water interceptor.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Contamination of surface water


Monitor the quality of waste water annually. Comply with water quality regulations of 2006.
Pre-treatment of waste water through an oil/water separator (OWS).
Provision of spill response kits for timely and effective management of large scale fuel spills.


Solid waste management


Contracting a NEMA licensed company for waste collection and onward disposal at relevant landfills.
Segregate waste at source.


Accidents related to fire hazards)


Purchase of fire fighting equipment and contracting a Fire Services Company for regular maintenance of equipment.
Display safety warning ‘’ no smoking , no naked flame.


Occupational health and safety


Purchase of PPE e.g. goggles, helmets, masks, hand gloves, ear muffs, safety boots, overalls for protection against body contact with petroleum products etc.
Construction crew at the site shall be sensitized on social issues such as alcohol and diseases. Construction crew at the site shall be sensitized on social issues such as alcohol and diseases.
Carrying out annual EHS audits in order to maintain environmental and staff safety standards.


Sanitation


Drainage of all stagnant water.
Provide sanitary facilities for construction workers.
No burning of any chemical and plastic containers.
Adequate sanitary facilities shall be provided and standard cleanliness provided.


Traffic hazards


Provide ample entry and exit points.
Contractor to plan traffic to avoid movement during human movement peak hours.


Offensive odours


Ensuring that underground bulk petroleum storage tanks covers are properly sealed.


Loss of biodiversity


Landscaping unpaved areas with appropriate vegetation species (preferably indigenous species) Light compaction of the site.
Plant grass on unpaved storm water ways.


Oil spillage


The layout design should clearly demarcate drainage and segregate contamination free water and potentially containment water.
Design to include installation of isolation valves at appropriate locations. Emergency disaster preparedness on spills should be developed and implemented.
Directing away spills from the tank farm towards the nearest corner next to the tanks.
Adequate capacity drainage lines, interceptor.
Properly constructed fuel off-loading areas with containment connected to the drainage leading to the OWS.
Checking all cylinders coming into the facility for any defects.
Elimination/control of leakage due to rapture of storage tanks arising from mechanical puncture, corrosion etc.
Elimination/control of leakage due to rapture of piping arising from mechanical rapture, corrosion, pressure build-up, loose connections, etc.


Sewage


The station will have a septic tank and soak pit.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kisumu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/4766570              National Environment Management Authority.

