
				Page: 1299AZETTE NOTICE NO. 3472
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED GATES OF PEARL CEMETERY, MEMORIAL PARK AND COMMERCIAL CENTRE ON PLOT L.R. NO. 10701 IN KINUNGI, NYANDARUA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Eastern Rift Sawmills Limited) proposes to develop a private run cemetery on plot L.R. No. 10701 situated in Kinungi, Nyandarua County.
The project will comprise a crematorium, restaurant, commercial centre and a memorial park on a 63 acre site that is bordered by the Nairobi-Nakuru Highway, to the north, the Kikuyu Escarpment Forest to the Southeast, and a mushroom farm to the west.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Anticipated Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Fall Hazards


Provide safety harnesses and scaffolding


Falling objects


Provide helmets.


Dust


Water the groundbefore and during excavation.


Noise


Use of ear protectors by workers.
Recondition engine exhaust systems.
Engine tune-up.
Establish inspection program for equipment.


Emissions


Use of respirators  by workers.
Recondition engine exhaust systems.
Engine tune-up.
Establish inspection program for equipment.


Sanitation


Provide temporary sanitary facilities.


Wastewater and sewage discharge


Discharge to Septic tanks.


Storage and handling of hazardous materials


Obtain material safety data sheets for all hazardous materials and products handled at the site.
Obtain personal protective equipment for the workers responsible for handling hazardous materials.
Train the workers on safe handling procedures.


Waste oil contamination


Provide labelled containers for waste oil.


Disposal of waste oil
 


Identify a licensed contractor to recycle oil.
Appoint a licensed contractor to collect waste oil.
Adhere to spill control procedures when handling waste oil.


Spill control


Obtain spill control kit.
Train staff on spill control.


Emergency response
 


Keep a record of the public emergency service telephone  umbers including:
Police.
Fire brigade.
Ambulance services.
Document an emergency response procedure.
Train staff on emergency response.


Regulatory compliance


Refer to relevant policy, legal and administrative framework and comply.


Environmental
Audits


To be carried out against the environmental management plan and the mitigation plan in this report.


Fire protection


Ensure fire fighting equipment are inspected semi-annually.


Disposal of solid waste


Appoint a licensed waste transporter


Noise


Restrict construction activities to day time.
Noise level Measurements.


Soil erosion


Site landscaping and planting of tree belts to prevent soil erosion and to reduce wind velocity.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nyandarua County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/4766859           National Environment Management Authority.

