
				Page: 1284GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3350
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED KPC LINE1 PIPELINE REPLACEMENT PROJECT BETWEEN MOMBASA AND NAIROBI
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Pipeline Company Limited) is proposing to construct a new 20-inch pipeline within the existing right of wat (ROW) between Nairobi and Mombasa (a distance of approximately 450 km); construct four new pump stations at Changamwe, Maungu, Mtito Andei, and Sultan Hamud; install two sets of new pumps in each of the above stations; and decomission the exisitng 14-inch pipeline.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Proposed Mitigation Measures 


Damage to surficial and sub-surface archeological artifacts


Engage an archeologist during the pre-construction and construction phase to monitor top soil stripping and excavation activities and recover any artifacts or fossils uncovered by such activities. The archeologist should also evaluate the construction camp sites for any artifacts.


Impacts on cultural change and conflict


Provide cultural awareness training to all EPC contractor staff members in order to respect local cultures where the project is carried out. The training should be provided in a culturally sensitive and ethical manner.
Incorporate cultural awareness programs in the EPC contractor’s HSE Plan for the proposed project.


Interference with existing land use patterns and access routes


Consult local communities during the trenching exercise to ensure that certain sections of the ROW are not trenched while construction activities continue in other trenched sections to allow cross over access to humans and animals.


Destruction of cultural heritage


Retain competent professionals to assist in the identification and protection of cultural heritage and report any chance finds for necessary actions.
Create provisions for the management of the accidental discovery of cultural material including burials. In the event that cultural objects are encountered, immediately contact the National Museums of Kenya; if a burial siteis discovered, immediately contact the local community leaders for advice and guidance.


Temporary blockage of fauna to water resources and foraging grounds


Allow a crossing of 800m for every 2km of excavated trench to allow human and animals to cross-over the ROW.
Accelerate the construction of pipeline in elephant ranges.
Consider development of alternative water resources for the animals if the pipeline trench is dug up and will not allow animals to safely cross over the ROW


Pitfalls resulting from trenching


Provide a temporary crossing over the trench to enable the small mammals, reptiles and amphibians cross easily before backfilling of soil is done.
Consider provision of a ramp to enable trapped animals to get out and monitor trenches for animal rescue at the expense of the Contractor


Potential attacks by wild animals in protected areas


KWS to provide security to all construction workers on a full-time basis during the construction of the pipeline within the national parks and other protected areas
KWS should restrict movement of construction personnel to the ROW construction workspace areas
Construction camp sites should be located outside the protected areas
Construction activities should be restricted between 07:00hrs and 18:30hrs within the protected areas
KWS/Contractor should sensitize workers within wildlife areas on hazards associated with working within protected areas


Animal movement diversions


Construct temporary watering points in areas where the trench and laid pipes would create a temporary barrier.
Construction of pipeline should be speeded in parks.
Excavation of long trenches should be avoided at the crossings.


Introduction of alien invasive species


Fully decontaminate all construction plant and equipment to be used for the project to the approval of relevant authorities. In protected areas such as Parks and Reserves, relevant authorities (such as KWS and KFS) will be involved to ensure decontamination process is satisfactory
Import gravel for renovating access roads within ROW from approved borrow pits.
KPC will work closely with relevant authorities such as the KWS and KFS if alien invasive species start appearing following completion of the construction phase of the proposed pipeline.


Impacts of poaching in protected areas


Screen contractor personnel working within the national parks and other protected areas.Contractor should work within the construction space of the ROW in full compliance of KWS and KFS rules and regulations.
KWS and KFS should screen contractor’s construction plant, equipment, containers, etc. KWS and KFS to enhance security surveillance at the cost of the contractor


Contamination of surface water


Ensure compliance with L.N. 120 discharge limits for potentially contaminated wastewater.
On site refueling will be done by trained personnel using mobile fuel browsers and will be at least 10 meters away from surface water body.
Hydrostatic test water should be discharged to the source water at an approved location along the waterway or to an upland area within the same catchment area where it may evaporate or infiltrate. Discharged hydrostatic testing water should be tested to ensure it meets Legal Notice No. 120: Water Quality Regulations, 2006 requirements.
The proponent to ensure sufficient emergency shutdown valves in the pipeline is provided at the design stage particularly for river crossings (more than 30m wide).
The proponent to regularly monitor the pipeline through the SCADA system and through regular ground and aerial surveillance.
The proponent to maintain pipeline integrity through pigging activities.
The proponent to develop procedures for monitoring river crossings during flooding
The proponent to regularly maintain the ROW.
The pipeline to be coated with anti-corrosion coating and be supplemented by cathodic protection.



Disruption of river crossings


For water crossings, the contractor should seek the necessary Authority and Permits from WRMA and other lead agencies for construction, damming and diversion of water from rivers.
The contractor shall prepare detailed drawings for construction of pipeline water crossings and a method statement for construction.


Soil erosion and sedimentation


The contractor to implement soil erosion prevention measures such as covering excavated soil with say plastic sheeting.
The contractor should also work with speed in such a way that the excavated soil is reused to cover the trench in the shortest time.
Appropriate crossing methods should be applied for river crossings to prevent erosion
Preconstruction and construction activities should if feasible take place during dry seasons for areas prone to stormwater and flooding damage


Impacts to groundwater


During the construction phase, there will be proper storage and handling of containers and tanks, including storage of containers with hazardous liquids in secondary containment structures;
Safety distances will be maintained for liquid transfer, vehicle equipment and washing; 30m to waterbodies, 60m from water supply wells, and 130m from municipal or community water wells;
Training of employees on the spill prevention measures will be conducted;
Maintenance of emergency spill kits in all service vehicles will be promoted


Construction phase impacts of noise


The contractors should comply with the requirements of Kenyan legislation on noise and international guidelines to ensure that noise levels do not exceed limits stipulated in them.
The contractor should provide hearing protection equipment to their workers and ensure that a hearing conservation program is implemented if the occupational noise levels exceed those stipulated in Kenyan regulations on noise.
The contractor should ensure that construction plant and equipment is properly maintained to prevent excess noise being generated due to improper maintenance of equipment


Disruption of unplanned buried infrastructure


KPC should immediately commence a sensitization process for community members along the ROW to formalize any underground utilities to avoid destruction during the construction phase
The EPC contractor should endeavor to be compassionate prior to uprooting any “unplanned” utilities and taking precautionary steps to avoid such destruction


Increased HIV/AIDS infection cases


The EPC contractor should have an HIV/AIDS Policy in place so that no discrimination takes place at the work site
The EPC contractor should have a peer educator program for HIV/AIDS and other wellness programs such as stress and stress management


Employment opportunities


The EPC contractor must have a documented HR management system which includes clearly defined recruitment policies of Kenya citizens
The EPC contractor should be an equal opportunity employer and must provide the first opportunities for employment to locals living near the construction spreads along the ROW
The EPC contractor should engage the provincial administration (DO, Area Chiefs, etc.) in posting vacancies for employment as soon as they arise on provincial administration notice boards.


Impacts on public safety


The EPC contractor will be required to comply with the OSHA and its subsidiary legislation as it applies to the proposed pipeline project;
The EPC contractor will be required to comply with the Construction
HSE Plan developed in this EIA Study;
HSE risk assessments will be conducted by the EPC contractor for all construction spreads to ensure that appropriate risk control measures are implemented throughout the construction phase;
The EPC contractor will arrange for HSE induction training of all staff working on the proposed project.  Refresher HSE training will be provided continually based on task risk assessments to be performed for all activities to be performed during the construction phase.
The EPC contractor will be required to comply with international petroleum industry HSE standards and codes of practice for the design and construction management of the proposed project.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
KODIA BISIA,
for Director-General,
MR/4730619              National Environment Management Authority.

