
				Page: 1293GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3467
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF A SEWERAGE SYSTEM  IN BOMET TOWNSHIP, BOMET COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project II) is proposing to construct a sewarage System in zones 111(Proposed industrial), 110(proposed hide and skin), 61(proposed site for works) and zone 19(proposed slaughter house), in Bomet Township, Bomet County.
The treatment ponds have been designed to treat 1,469m3/day mainly to be generated in Chepngaina Sub-location which forms Bomet Township. Two trains have been designed each with six ponds (A1, F1, M1, M2, M3 and M4) with each train capable of treating 734.5m3/day. Due to the problem in identifying for land for Waste Stabilization Ponds, only one train with capacity to treat 734.5m3/day with associated structures has been considered.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact 


Proposed Mitigation Measures


Open trenches hazardous to individuals
 


Backfilling trenches as soon as works are completed.
Warning signs at both deep and shallow trenches.
Provide protection rails when constructing sections of the deep trenches.
Dumping of collapsed pipes and surplus excavated material (eyesore).


Noise pollution
 


Ensure regular servicing of equipment and machinery.
Enforce workers discipline on site.
Programme work to take minimum time.
Construction works to be done during day time.
Heavy constructing machinery to be enclosed.
Use equipments that have low noise emissions.
Use equipment fitted with noise reduction devices such as mufflers.
Operate noise generating equipment during regular working hours so as to reduce the potential of producing noise during night hours.
Heavy equipment should be transported early morning with proper pilotage.
Construction workers operating equipment that generates noise greater than 80 dB should be equipped with noise protection devices and their use enforced.


Soil erosion
 


Water channels to be regularly maintained and repaired to avoid point discharge in case of breakage and or blockage.
Source building materials from known sustainable sites to minimize extraction impacts.
Ensure that any compacted areas are ripped to reduce run off.


Soil, water and groundwater contamination
 


Construct oil- water interceptors to capture discharge of oils, fuels and other polluting liquids.
Ensure proper handling of lubricants, fuels and solvents while maintaining the equipment.
Control surface runoff by temporarily berming the outlet of the significant storm water features to provide some detention behind the berms.


Solid waste generation
 


The bins at both the campsite and construction sites should be emptied regularly to prevent overfilling Bins should be strategically placed within the campsite and construction sites. They should also be covered to prevent access by vermin and minimize odour.
Use of cleaner technologies / generation to minimize on generation of solid wastes. Solid wastes to be recycled, reused and utilized in an environmentally acceptable manner.
A waste management plan to be developed to handle temporary storage, transport and disposal of hazardous waste. Segregation of wastes before disposal.


Dust emission
 


Use of appropriate PPE by construction workers
Sensitize the employees on sound environmental management.
Use dust nets at high level of the building.
Provide appropriate enclose for concrete mixers.


Occupational Safety Concerns
 


Hiring of competent staff to perform works.
Follow proper work guidelines.
Provide insurance to the workers.
There should be presence of fully equipped first aid kit at site.
To have emergency preparedness plans in place.


Pollution of river Nyagores by unsatisfactory
treated waste water


Regular inspection of the system to ensure performance is maintained at high levels.
Blockages should be detected and promptly replaced.
Regular monitoring and sampling of the waste water at influx and effluent points as well as in the receiving water bodies.
Creation of an artificial wetland along the boundary between River Nyangores and the stabilization ponds.


Occupational Health and safety
 


Provide appropriate training and regular on occupational health and safety.
Provide appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) to workers and any visitors including First Aid facilities for staff as per the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2007.
Develop and implement a detailed and site specific Emergency Response Plans.


Sludge waste from the ponds
 


 Tapping 100% of gases generated from the facility, this will be tapped in the sludge digesters, the gases of which are responsible for the foul smell associated by with wastewater treatment system.
Maintain high standards of hygiene within the system.
The sludge wastes should be promptly removed from site and disposed appropriately in a designated landfill.
Contract a NEMA certified waste collection firm to collect sludge waste for central disposal point.
Construction of storm water drainage system; and Construction of offsite pit for handling of sludge.
Ensure only NEMA licensed company exhausts the sludge from the waste water treatment plant.
Ensure that once exhausted the sewage is disposed at a NEMA licensed facility for sewage management and disposal.


Effluent handling
 


The system must be designed and adequately sized to be able to treat all the effluent generated from the Bomet Township to the required standards.
Proper servicing of machineries on site according to manufactures details, proper liquid waste collection system should be provided on site, stabilizing lagoons could be constructed to hold waste water before releasing into the river.
Management to apply for a license to discharge effluent to environment.
Employees to be trained on the operation and maintenance of whatever effluent treatment system that will be put in place.
Any pipes leakages and bursts in the system to be promptly fixed.
Local ground water to be monitored periodically by sampling and testing water from borehole in the neighbourhood every three months to check whether there are any traces of effluent finding their way to ground water aquifers.
Periodic Sampling of two strategic points within River Nyangore.
Treated effluent to be periodically analysed (every three months) to ensure BOD is maintained at 30mg/l or less and COD at 50mg/l or less.


Water usage
 


Approximate volumes of water to be required during construction of the project to be computed in order to put in place mechanisms of reliable supply.
Approximate volumes of water to be required per project in a specified time period to be computed in order to put in place mechanisms of reliable supply.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Bomet County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/4944930              National Environment Management Authority.

