
				Page: 1286GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3351
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MASTER PLAN FOR GALANA OIL KENYA, MOMBASA ROAD, NEAR ATHI RIVER, MACHAKOS COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Galana Oil (K) Limited) proposes to construct the following infrastructure: service station, LPG pumps/ compressor sheds, truck loading and offloading area, LPG filling plant and immediate storage, lubes store, fire water tank, fire pump house, truck parking facility, control room, gated access, petroleum tanks, office blocks, borehole, and wash rooms on Plot L.R. No. 337/857 Mombasa Road near Athi River, Machakos County.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impacts


Mitigation Measures 


Geology and soils


All quarry sites shall be clearly indicated on the plan and approved by the local authority for use.
To prevent erosion all non-built up areas should be landscaped.


Surface water


If possible initial construction activities should be undertaken during the dry season to prevent water/soil run-off especially on side slopes.
Water should also be diverted away from the project footprint areas through properly constructed drainage channels.
Ensure that spills emanating from construction plant and equipment are cleaned immediately before release to the environment.
Contractor to adhere to construction HSE management plan during the construction phase.


Air Quality


Develop and implement effective measures for minimization of dust followed by rehabilitation in a timely manner.
Contractor to ensure that construction plant and equipment is in a good state of repair at all times to prevent adverse exhaust air emissions.


Waste


Develop and implement safe procedures for management of nonhazardous and hazardous wastes in accordance with L.N. 121: Waste Management Regulations, 2006.


Noise and vibration


Contractor’s plant and equipment should comply as a minimum with requirements of L.N. 25: Noise Prevention and Control Rules, 2005.
The power plant will be designed to maintain noise levels at 70dB (A) at the fence line.
The Proponent will develop, rollout and implement a written hearing conservation program for those employees that may be exposed to noise environments exceeding 90 dB (A) over an 8-hour time weighted average period or 85 dB (A) continuous noise. This is in accordance with L.N. 25: Noise Prevention and Control Rules 2005.


Creation of employment opportunities


Implement where feasible measures to employ local community members.
Develop and put into practice strategies to minimize crime, to include effective communication with landowners to inform them about the movement of work teams, and codes of conduct for contractors and employees creation.


Increased risk of disease with influx of workers and opportunity seekers


Implement measures to manage expectations about job creation.
Develop and implement a HSE program for employees.


Social divisions over limited jobs and perceived preferential access


Develop and implement transparent employment and procurement measures which comply with the regulatory framework and maximize local benefits.


Accidents as a result of increased traffic


Implement measures to ensure that traffic and road safety hazards are minimized.


Traffic


Develop and implement measures to repair regularly used roads to the project site especially the turn-off to the project site.
Ensure that contractor vehicles comply with axle load limits.
Develop and implement a traffic management plan to take advantage of off-peak hours for delivery of construction materials and abnormal loads.


Health and
Safety


Develop and implement contractor safety rules which include the relevant provisions of OSHA, WIBA and their respective subsidiary legislation.
Specifically ensure that the construction complies with L.N.40: Building Operations and Work of Engineering Construction Rules, 1984.


Corporate Social Responsibility


The proponent with the help of the local administration and local NGOs (such as People to People Tourism) should develop guiding principles for determining how the company selects which causes to support the local community that will contribute to sustainable benefits for the community.
The Proponent should also participate in community driven development initiatives, which may involve donation of people’s time, skills and knowledge.
The proponent is advised to:
Put in place education sponsorship programs
Consider constructing a primary school for the local children
Support community health workers
Liaise with local NGO’s in supporting the local community.
One outstanding NGO in the area known as People to People Tourism which advocates for children’s health especially within the local slums.
The Proponent is advised to liaise with the organization as well as identify other thematic areas in which they can offer their support to the community.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Machakos County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ROBERT ORINA,
for Director-General,
MR/4730643              National Environment Management Authority.

