
				Page: 1283GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3349
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL STATION ON PLOT NO. 1499 NAMANGA, OFF NAMANGA–NAIROBI ROAD IN KAJIADO COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Gulf Energy Limited) is proposing to construct a service station on plot L.R NO 1499 Namanga off Namanga – Nairobi Road in Kajiado County
The petrol service station will comprise of a an impermeable concrete surface under the canopy,a u-shaped drainage tunnel with a steel grill top,underground fuel tanks (30m3 diesel tank, 15m3 kerosene, 30m3 super petrol) ,three breather points,a Heavy duty covered man hole for each of the underground tanks,Station manager office and station sales office,a store ,Sanitary facilities both for ladies and gents ,a septic tank ,3 pit interceptor, ,Compressor and generator section,a steel canopy,ribbed concrete finish under the steel canopy ,2 pump isles,electronic fuel dispensers,associated piping work,fire assembly points,Entrance and exit
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Noise and Vibration levels


Barricading the area (erecting a boundary wall)
Construction activities to be conducted during the day.
Provision of appropriate Personal Protective equipment to protect workers from occupational noise
Regular maintenance of plants and equipment
Shutting down of engine vehicles when not in use to reduce on noise levels
Conducting of noise measurements from different positions within and outside the workplace to establish prevailing noise levels and recommending appropriate mitigation measures.


 Air pollution


Use of dump method to mitigate on dust by sprinkling water on areas to be excavated.
Soil compaction


Pressure on existing infrastructure i.e. roads, power, water among others


Erection of warning and informative signs. i.e. notices, bill boards at the site during the construction phase and traffic control along the connecting road. 


Contamination of the ground with oil and grease substances


Maintenance should be carried out at designated service bays to avoid contamination of environment by resultant oil and greases.


Oil leaks and spills


Regular inspection of underground tanks for leakages
Construction of a three pit oil interceptor tanks to separate oil from sludge.
Double walling of underground tanks to guard against leaks
Protecting the underground tanks with corrosion prevention materials
Prioritizing the upgrade of equipment and installation of existing facilities of a network after a defined age.
Careful siting of the project to ensure that it lies in an environment that is far from environmental receptors including sewers, tunnels, vaults, surface water reservoirs etc.


Destruction of soil structure


Ensure use of manual labour and hand tools where appropriate.
Ensure the contractor takes the shortest time possible.


Soil and Ground Water contamination


Regular hydraulic pressure testing of the underground tanks.
Non destructive testing, for example, ultrasound testing.


Generation of contaminated waste water and storm water


Minimization of volume of storm water generated from vehicle fueling stations and AST containment areas through installation of roofs or other types of covers
Implementation of secondary containment procedures that avoid accidental or intentional releases of contaminated containment fluids
Segregation of clean drainage and potentially contaminated drainage, treating the latter through oil/water separators. Oil water separators may include baffle type or coalescing plate type. They should be properly designed, operated, and maintained to achieve the desired water treatment results.


Scraps and other debris on site


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options
Wastes generated as a result of facility decommissioning activities will be characterized in compliance with standard waste management procedures. Disposal locations will be selected by the contractor based on the properties of the particular waste stream.


Health and Safety


During construction, increased dust, noise and air pollution levels could impact on health and safety, particularly in the direct impact zone.
During the operation of the project health and safety conditions will be linked more on handling of petroleum products. These will be effectively mitigated on through the use of appropriate PPEs at all times and proper handling of the petroleum products.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/4944776              National Environment Management Authority.

