
				Page: 2197GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  3709
TASKFORCE ON REVAMPING OF THE KENYA BROADCASTING CORPORATION
(Cap. 446)
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communications and Technology has appointed a Taskforce on the revamping of the Kenya Broadcasting Corporation.
The Taskforce shall comprise of the following members—
Ben Ngene Gituku—(Chairperson);
Members:
Francis Munywoki
Judy Munyinyi
Waithaka Waihenya
Daniel Obam (Eng.)
Lorna Irungu
Kepha Bosire
Joint Secretaries:
Charity Kagiri
Lydia Rotich
The terms of reference of the Taskforce are—
(a) to study, examine and review strategies, structures, processes and systems within Kenya Broadcasting Corporation and advice on their appropriateness;
(b) to make recommendations on the modalities of revamping Kenya Broadcasting Corporation as a modern National Public Broadcaster;
(c)  To carry out such studies/research as may inform on its mandate.
The Taskforce shall have the powers necessary to undertake any matter incidental or ancillary to the matters stated herein.
The Taskforce may co-opt such other persons, who possess the appropriate competencies as are necessary for the performance of the terms of reference.The Taskforce shall—

(a) prepare and submit a detailed work plan and monthly progress reports to the Cabinet Secretary;
(b) prepare any documents related to the terms of reference; and
(c)  hold consultative meetings with the Cabinet Secretary, sector stakeholders and members of public.
The Taskforce shall regulate its own procedure.
The Secretariat of the Taskforce shall be based at the Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology.
The Taskforce shall submit the final report to the Cabinet Secretary within three (3) months from the date of its commencement.
The duration of the Taskforce shall be for a period of three (3) months with effect from the date it takes office and the Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communications and Technology, may when necessary, extend the period.
Dated the 17th May, 2016.
JOE MUCHERU,
Cabinet Secretary for Informations, Communication and Technology.

