
				Page: 2498GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  7854
TASKFORCE ON INTERNSHIPS/ATTACHMENTS
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary for Education, Science and Technology, has constituted a Taskforce on Internships and attachments comprising of the following:
Eusebius J. Mukhwana (Dr.)—(Chairperson)
Irene Moraa Ogamba (Ms.)—(Vice-Chairperson)
Members:
Isaac G. Kamande
Joseph Muriithi Njue
Edwin Tarno
Eunice W. Kairo (Dr.)
Stephen O. Obiro
Damaris Muhika (Sr.)
Nicholas Letting (Dr.)
Henry Munyasia
David Mwaweu
George Odero
Joseph Wairiuko
Mutheu Kasanga (Ms.)
Karanja Njuguna
The Secretariat of the Taskforce will be based at the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology Headquarters and will be comprised of the following members of staff:
Josephine Mwangi (Ms.)
Truphena Odoul (Dr.)
Elijah Obwori
Bathlomew Lumbasi
Elijah Mungai
Willis O. Ayub
Terms of Reference for the Taskforce:
The Mandate of the committee will be—
(a) to interrogate policies, laws, existing programs and administrative instruments on  internship/attachment in Kenya;
(b) to prepare a roadmap for development of a harmonized policy and a National Strategy for Internship/ Attachment in Kenya;
(c)  to develop a Harmonized Policy on Internship/Attachment in Kenya;
(d) to recommend changes in legislation  where applicable;
(e)  to develop a National Strategy for Internship/Attachment in Kenya.
Expected Output:
(a) Report on state of internship/attachment in Kenya.
(b) Roadmap for development of a harmonized policy and a National Strategy for Internship/ Attachment in Kenya.
(c)  Draft National Harmonized Policy on Internship/Attachment in Kenya.
(d) Proposed/ recommended changes in existing laws.
(e)  Draft National Strategy for Internship/ Attachment in Kenya.
In the performance of its functions, the Taskforce may—
(a) from time to time co-opt  Persons who possess the relevant expertise, skill and experience which it considers necessary and proper;
(b) carry out such studies as may inform the Cabinet Secretary on the decision;
(c)  solicit, receive and consider views from members of public and other interest groups; and
(d) conduct any other activities required for effective discharge of its mandate.
The Taskforce will regulate its own procedure;
The Taskforce will remain in office for a period of 6 months from 1st September, 2015 or for such longer period as the Cabinet Secretary may prescribe by notice in the gazette; 
The Taskforce shall—
(a) every quarter, prepare and submit to the Cabinet secretary reports of its progress; and
(b) propose interim recommendations within three months of its appointment.
Dated the 29th September, 2015.
JACOB T. KAIMENYI,
Cabinet Secretary.

