
				Page: 2525GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  7955
THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY ACT
(No. 19 of 2012)
THE SALARIES AND REMUNERATION COMMISSION
LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE FOR STATE OFFICERS IN THE SALARIES AND REMUNERATION COMMISSION
(A commitment to abide by the requirements of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012)
OUTLINE OF THE CODE
Preamble
PART I—PRELIMINARY
Citation
Interpretation
Application of Code
Application of the Public Officer Ethics Act, 2003
State Officers to sign the Code
PART II—REQUIREMENTS
Rule of Law
Public Trust
Responsibility and duties
Performance of duties
Professionalism
Financial Probity
Moral and Ethical requirements
Gifts and Benefits in Kind
Wrongful or unlawful acquisition of property
Conflict of Interest
Participation in tenders
Public Collections
Bank Accounts outside Kenya
Acting for Foreigners
Care of Property
Misuse of Official Information
Political Neutrality
Impartiality
Giving of Advice
Offers of Future Employment
Former State Officer acting in a government or public entity matter
Misleading the Public
Falsification of records
Conduct of Private affairs
Bullying
Acting through others
Reporting improper orders
Confidentiality
Duty to prevent occurrence of corruption or unethical practice in the Commission
Promotion of ethics, integrity and best practices in the Commission
Dress Code
Implementation of the Code
Review
Breach of Code
Establishment of the Code
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by Section 37 of the Leadership and Integrity Act 2012, The Salaries and Remuneration Commission establishes this Leadership and Integrity Code for the State Officers in the Commission.
THE LEADESHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE FOR STATE OFFICERS IN THE SALARIES AND REMUNERATION COMMISSION
Preamble
This Code is established pursuant to section 37 of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012 which requires every public entity to prescribe a Specific Leadership and Integrity Code for the State Officers in the entity. The Code is intended to establish standards of integrity and ethical conduct in the leadership of the Commission by ensuring that the State Officers respect the values, principles and requirements of the Constitution in the discharge of their duties.
PART I—PRELIMINARY
Citation
This Code may be cited as the Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers in the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
Interpretation
In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Act” means the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012;
“Bank account” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act.
 “EACC” means the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission established under section 3 of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Act, 2011 or its successor body and harmonizing with the provisions where references are made to the body.
“Business associate” means a person who does business with or on behalf of a state officer and has express or implied authority from that State Officer;
 “Code” means the Leadership and Integrity Code for the Salaries and Remuneration Commission;
“Commission” means the Salaries and Remuneration Commission established under the Salaries and Remuneration Act, 2011;
“General Code” means the Code prescribed under part II of the Act;
“Personal interest” means a matter in which a State Officer has a direct or indirect pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest and includes the interest of his/her spouse, child, business associate or agent;
“Regulations” means the Regulations made by the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission pursuant to Section 54 of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012;
“Spouse” means a wife or husband;
“State Officer” means a Chairperson, Member and/or Secretary/ Chief Executive Officer of the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
Application of Code
This Code applies to State Officers in the Commission.
Application of the Constitution , the Public Officer Ethics Act, 2003 and the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2011
(1) The provisions of Chapter six of the Constitution shall form part of this code;
(2) Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the provisions of the Public Ethics Act and the Third Schedule to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act shall form part of this Code in so far as they conform to the provisions of the Leadership and Integrity Act.
State Officers to sign Code
(1) A State Officer appointed to the Commission shall sign and commit to this Code at the time of taking oath of office or within seven days (7) of assuming office or;
(2) A serving State Officer shall sign and commit to this code seven (7) days upon publication of the Code in the Kenya Gazette.
PART II—REQUIREMENTS
Rule of Law
(1) A State Officer shall respect and abide by the Constitution and the law;
(2) A State Officer shall carry out the duties of his/her office in accordance with the law;
(3) In carrying out the duties of his/her office, a State officer shall not violate the rights and fundamental freedoms of any person unless otherwise expressly provided for in the law and in accordance with Article 24 of the Constitution.
Public Trust
A State Officer is apposition of public trust and the authority and responsibility vested in a State officer shall be exercised by the State Officer in the interest of the Commission and the people of Kenya.
Responsibility and Duties
Subject to the Constitution and any other law, a State Officer shall take personal responsibility for the reasonably foreseeable consequences of any actions or omissions arising from the discharge of their duties of his/ her office.
Performance of Duties
A State Officer shall, to the best of his/ her ability:
(1) Carry out the duties of the office efficiently and honestly;
(2) Carry out the duties of the office in a transparent and accountable manner;
(3) Keep accurate records and documents relating to the functions of the office; and
(4) Report truthfully on all matters of the Commission.
10. Professionalism
A State officer shall:
(1) Carry out the duties of his/her office in a manner that maintains public confidence in the integrity of the office;
(2) Treat members of the public, staff and other State and Public officers with courtesy and respect;
(3) Not discriminate against any person, except as is expressly provided by the law;
(4) To the extent appropriate to the office, maintain high standards of performance and level of professionalism within the Commission; and
(5) If the State officer is a member of a professional body, observe and subscribe to the ethical and professional requirements of that body in so far as the requirements do not contravene the Constitution, any other law or this Code.
11. Financial Probity
(1) A State officer shall not use his or her office to unlawfully or wrongfully enrich himself or any other person;
(2) Subject to Article 76(2)(b) of the Constitution, a State officer shall not accept a personal loan or benefit which may compromise the State Officer in carrying out his or her duties;
(3) A State Officer shall submit an initial declaration of assets and liabilities within thirty days of assuming office in the Commission and thereafter bi-annually;
(4) A State Officer shall not:
(a)  Evade paying taxes
(b) Neglect their financial obligations
(c)  Any person intending to be appointed as a State Officer shall submit to the EACC a self-declaration form in the form set out in the First Schedule to the Act.
12. Moral and Ethical Requirements
(1) A State Officer shall observe and maintain the following ethical and moral requirements-
(a)  Demonstrate honesty in the conduct of his or her public and private affairs;
(b) Not to engage in activities that amount to abuse of office;
(c)  Accurately and honestly represent information to the public;
(d) Not engage in wrongful conduct in furtherance of personal benefit;
(e)  Not misuse public resources;
(f)  Not falsify any records;
(g)  Not sexually harass or have inappropriate sexual relations with other State Officers, Staff of the Commission or any other person;
(h) Not engage in actions which would lead to the State officer’s removal from the membership of professional body in accordance with the law; and
(i)   Not neglect family or parental obligations as provided for under any law.
13. Gifts or Benefits in Kind
(1) A gift or donation given to a State Officer on a public or official occasion shall be treated as a gift or donation of the Commission;
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (i) above, a State Officer may receive a gift given to the State Officer in an official capacity, provided that-
(a) the gift is within the ordinary bounds of propriety, a usual expression of courtesy or protocol and within the ordinary standards of hospitality;
(b) the gift does not exceed an amount prescribed by the Regulations under the Act  or any other law.
(c) the gift is not monetary.
(3) A State Officer shall not—
(a) accept or solicit gifts, hospitality or other benefits from a person who;
(i) is under investigation;
(ii) has a contractual relationship with the Commission;
(iii) has any interest that is directly or indirectly connected with the State Officer's duties;
(b) receive a gift which has the potential of compromising his or her integrity;
(c) accept any type of gift expressly prohibited under the Act;
(4) Subject to Section 13(2), a State Officer who receives a gift or donation shall surrender           the gift or donation to the Commission within fourteen days of receipt of the gift.
(5) The Commission shall maintain a register of all gifts received by State Officers as provided for in the regulations.
14. Wrongful or Unlawful Acquisition of Property
A State Officer shall not use the office to wrongfully acquire or influence the acquisition of property.
15. Conflict of Interest
(1) A State Officer shall use the best efforts to avoid being in a situation where his or her personal interest conflict or appear to conflict with the State Officer's official duties.
(2) Without limiting  the generality of subsection (1), a State Officer shall not hold shares or have any other interest in a Corporation , partnership or other body, directly or through another person, if holding those shares or having that interest would result in a conflict of the State Officer's official duties.
(3) A State Officer whose personal interests conflict with their official duties shall declare the personal interests to the Commission.
(4) The Commission may give directions on the appropriate action to be taken by the State Officer to avoid the conflict of interest and the State Officer shall comply with the directions; and refrain from participating in any deliberations with respect to the matter. Any direction issued by the Commission under the subsection shall be in writing.
(5) Notwithstanding any directions to the contrary under subsection (4), a State Officer shall not award or influence the award of a contract to:
(a) himself or herself;
(b) the State Officer's spouse or child;
(c) a business associate or agent; or
(d) a corporation, private company, partnership or other body in which the officer has a substantial or controlling interest.
(6) Where a State Officer is present at a meeting, and an issue which is likely to result in a conflict of interest is to be discussed, the State Officer shall declare the interest at the beginning of the meeting or before the issue is deliberated upon.
(7) A declaration of a conflict of interest under subsection (6) shall be recorded in the minutes of that meeting.
(8) The Commission shall maintain a register of conflicts of interest in the prescribed form in which an affected State Officer shall register the particulars of the registrable interests, stating the nature and extent of the conflict.
(9) For purposes of subsection (8), the registrable interests shall include:
(a) The interests set out in the Second Schedule of the Act;
(b) Any connection with a person or a company, whether by relation, friendship, holding of shares or otherwise, which is subject to an investigation by the Commission;
(c) Any application for employment or other form of engagement with the Commission, by a family member or friend of the State Officer or by a corporation associated with the State Officer;
(d) Any application to the Commission, by a family member or friend of the State Officer, for clearance with respect to appointment or election to any public office;
(e) Any other matter which, in the opinion of the State Officer, taking into account the circumstances thereof, is necessary for registration as a conflict of interest.
(10)  The Commission shall keep the register of conflicts of interests for five years after the last entry in each volume of the register;
(11)  The Commission shall prepare a report of the registered interests within thirty days after the close of a financial year;
(12)  A State Officer shall ensure that an entry of registrable interests under Subsection (7) is updated and to notify the Commission of any changes in the registrable interests, within one month of each change occurring.
16. Participation in tenders issued by the Commission
(1) A State Officer shall not participate in a tender for the supply goods or services to the Commission.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a company or entity associated with the State Officer shall not be construed as trading with the Commission unless:
(a)  The State Officer has a controlling shareholding in the company or entity; or
(b) The State Officer is a Director of the Company.
17. Public Collections
(1) A State Officer shall not solicit for contributions from the Commission or any other person or entity for a public purpose unless the President has, by notice in the Gazette, declared a national disaster and allowed a public collection for the purpose of the national disaster in accordance with the law;
(2) A State Officer shall not participate in a public collection of funds in a way that reflects adversely on that State Officer's integrity, impartiality or interferes with the performance of the official duties.
(3) Subject to Subsection (2), a State Officer may, with the approval of the Commission, participate in a collection involving a private cause as may be approved by the Commission.
18. Bank Accounts outside Kenya
(1) Subject to Article 76(2) of the Constitution or any other written law, a State Officer shall not open or continue to operate a bank account outside Kenya without the approval of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission;
(2) A State Officer who has reasonable grounds for opening  or operating a bank account outside Kenya shall apply to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission for approval to open or operate a bank account;
(3) A State Officer who operates or controls the operation of a bank account outside  Kenya shall submit statements of the account annually to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission authorize it to verify the statements and any other relevant information from the foreign financial institution in which the account is held;
(4) Subject to subsections (1) and (2), a person who is appointed as a State Officer in the Commission and has a bank account outside Kenya shall, upon such appointment, close the bank account within six months;
(5) Subject to subsection (4), a State Officer may open or continue to operate a bank account outside Kenya as may be authorized by the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission in writing.
19. Acting for Foreigners
(1) A State Officer shall not be an agent of, or further the interests of a foreign government, organization or individual in a manner that may be detrimental to the security interests of Kenya, except when acting in the course of official duty.
(2) For the purposes of this section—
(a)  an individual is a foreigner if the individual is not a citizen of Kenya; and
(b) an organization is foreign if it is established outside Kenya or is owned or controlled by a foreign government, organization or individual.
20. Care of Property
(1) A State Officer shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that public property in the officer's custody, possession or control is taken care of and is in good repair and condition;
(2) A State Officer shall not use public property, funds or services that are acquired in the course of or as a result of the official duties, for activities that are not related to the official work of the State Officer;
(3) A State Officer shall return to the Commission all the public property in their custody, possession or control at the end of the appointment term;
(4) A State Officer who contravenes subsection (2) 0r (3) shall, in addition to any other penalties provided for under the Constitution, the Act or any other law, be personally liable for any loss or damage to the public property.
21. Misuse of Official Information
(1) A State Officer shall not directly or indirectly use or allow any person under the officer's authority to use any information obtained through or in connection with the office, which is not available in the Public domain, for the furthering of any private interest, whether financial or otherwise.
(2) A State Officer shall not violate the requirements of subsection (1), if the information is to be used for the purposes of—
(a)  furthering the interests of the Act
(b) educational, research, literary, scientific or other purposes not prohibited by law.
22. Political Neutrality
(1) A State Officer, shall not in the performance of his/her duties-
(a)  act as an agent for, or further the interests of a political party or candidate an election; or
(b) manifest support for or operation to any political party or candidate in an election.
(2) engage in any political activity that may compromise or be seen to compromise the political neutrality of the office subject to any laws relating to elections.
23. Impartiality
A State Officer shall, at all times, carry out the duties of the office with impartiality and objectivity in accordance with Articles 10, 27, 73(2)(b) and 232 of the Constitution and shall not practice favoritism, nepotism, tribalism, cronyism, religious bias or engage in corrupt or unethical practices.
24. Giving Advice
A State Officer who has a duty to give advice shall give honest, accurate and impartial advice without fear or favor.
25. Other Future Employment
(1) A State Officer shall not allow himself or herself to be influenced in the performance of their duties by plans or expectations for or offers of future employment or benefits;
(2) A State Officer shall disclose, in writing, to the Commission, all offers of future employment or benefits that could place the State Officer in a situation of conflict of interest.
26. Former State Officer in the Commission
A former State Officer shall not be engaged by the Commission in a matter in which the State Officer was originally engaged in as a State Officer, for at least two years after leaving the Commission.
27. Misleading the Public
A State Officer shall not knowingly give false or misleading information to any person.
28. Falsification of Records
A State Officer shall not falsify any records or misrepresent information to the public.
29. Conduct of Private Affairs
A State Officer shall conduct their private affairs in a manner that maintains public confidence in the integrity of the office.
30. Bullying
(1) A State Officer shall not bully another State Officer, a member of staff or any other person.
(2) For purposes of subsection (1), "bullying" includes repeated offensive behavior which is vindictive, cruel, malicious or humiliating and is intended to undermine a person.
31. Acting through Others
(1) A State Officer shall not—
(a)  cause anything to be done through another person that would constitute a contravention of this Code, the Constitution or any other law if done by the State Officer; or
(b) allow or direct a person under their supervision or control to do anything that is in contravention of this Code, the Constitution of any other law.
(2) Subsection (1)(b) shall not apply where anything is done without the State Officer's knowledge or consent or if the State Officer has taken reasonable steps to prevent it.
(3) A State Officer who acts under an unlawful direction shall be responsible for his or her actions.
32. Reporting Improper Orders
(1) If a State Officer considers that anything required of them is in contravention of the Code or is otherwise improper or unethical, the State Officer shall report the matter to the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission.
(2) The Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission shall investigate the report and take appropriate action within ninety days of receiving the report.
33. Confidentiality
A State Officer shall not disclose or cause to be disclosed any information in his or her custody to any unauthorized person. Further, matters which come to the knowledge of state officers during their tenure in office shall not be divulged after the state officer leaves office.
34.           Duty to Prevent Occurrence of Corruption or Unethical Practice in the Commission
A State Officer who believes or has reason to believe that a corrupt  act or unethical malpractice has occurred or is about to occur in the Commission shall take all necessary measures to prevent it from continuing or materializing in addition to any other appropriate action.
35. Promotion of ethics, Integrity and best Practices in the Commission
State Officers in the Commission shall collectively and individually take measures to ensure that staff of the Commission uphold and practice the highest attainable degree of integrity in the performance of duties.
36. Dress Code
A  State Officer shall maintain appropriate standard of dress and personal hygiene at all times.
37. Implementation of the Code
The Commission shall be responsible for ensuring full implementation of this Code.
38. Review
The Code shall be reviewed at such intervals as the Commission may determine subject to the approval of the EACC.
39. Breach of Code
(1) Breach of this Code amounts to misconduct for which the State Officer may be subjected to disciplinary proceedings including removal from office;
(2) Where a breach of this Code amounts to a violation of the Constitution, the State Officer may be removed from office in accordance with Article 251 of the Constitution;
(3) Any person may lodge a complaint to the EACC alleging a breach of this Code by a State Officer;
(4) A State Officer under investigations may be suspended pending outcome of the investigations if in the opinion of the EACC such suspension shall be necessary.
Form J                                                                            (r.35 (2))
COMMITMENT TO SPECIFIC LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE
(Where the public entity has developed a specific code)
I…………………………………....................................................... confirm that I have read and understood the Specific Leadership and
Integrity Code for……………………………. (name of public entity) and hereby commit to abide by the provisions of the Code.
Sworn at……………………………..       }
By the said…………………………..   }              …...........................
This ………….. day of……………20…..               }              Deponent
Before Me                                                              }
                                                               }
Commissioner for Oaths/Magistrate       }
Made on the ……………………………….., 2015

