
				Page: 2521GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  7954
BARINGO COUNTY GOVERNMENT
BARINGO COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
ANNUAL REPORT AS AT 31ST DECEMBER, 2014
Introduction
County Public Service Board  Governance, Objectives and Functions
2.1   Board Governance Structure
2.2   Board Committees
2.3   Commencement of work
Accomplishments by The County Public Service Board For The year Ending 31st December 2014
3.1   Recruitment
3.2   Training
3.3   Developed Policies
3.4   Performance Contracting/Appraisal
3.5   Probation Policy Implementation
3.6   Promotion of National Values and Principles
Challenges Faced and Proposed Solutions
Conclusion and Way Forward
1. Introduction
The Constitution of Kenya, 2010, divides the territory of Kenya into forty-seven counties, specified in the First Schedule thereto, one of which is Baringo County. The Constitution further vests sovereign power of  Kenya in the people. This sovereign power is exercised at two levels, namely
National level  and  County level.
Devolution as exemplified by the county government system in Kenya, service delivery and socio-economic development are inter-twinned and aims at enhancing and accelerating balanced social and economic development in the country. Therefore, to achieve this objective, the Constitution in Article 6 (2) requires the governments at the national and county levels to consult and co-operate even as they are distinct because they are inter-dependent.
1.1 The Objectives of Devolution  under Article 174 of the Constitution, include:
To recognize the right of communities to manage their own affairs and to further their development; and
To promote social and economic development and provide proximate and easily available services throughout Kenya.
The Constitution has conferred on county governments various executive, legislative and oversight functions intended to achieve these objectives. In addition, the County governments have the power to manage and co-ordinate county administration and its departments so as to ensure effective and efficient public service delivery. In doing this, they are enjoined to reflect the principles set out in Article 175 of the Constitution which include:
That county governments shall have reliable sources of revenue to enable them to govern and deliver services effectively, and
That the county governments shall be based on the democratic principles and separation of powers to enhance and promote democracy and accountability in the exercise of power
Whether or not the county governments fully realize the objectives of devolution much will depend on the existence in the counties of legal and institutional frameworks to effectively and efficiently deliver services to the people. Some of the frameworks have been established by the Constitution itself while others are to be created through legislative measures at the county and national levels. Among these is the institutional framework to establish and maintain in each county, in accordance with section 56 of the County Governments Act, a professional and efficient public service that will ensure responsive, prompt, accountable, effective and economic use of resources.
1.2 The County Public Service Board's Composition, Objectives and Functions
Article 235 of the Constitution requires every county to be responsible for the establishment of a public service in accordance with uniform norms and standards prescribed by an Act of Parliament. Accordingly, section 57 of the County Governments'  Act establishes a Public Service Board for every county. The Board comprises of  Chairperson, not less than three and not more than five members and a Secretary, all of whom are nominated and appointed by the Governor with the approval of the County Assembly.
County Public Service Boards (CPSB) are devolved governance units established for the purpose of establishing and managing professional, effective and efficient public service to enable the county governments achieve the objectives of devolution.
The powers and functions of a County Public Service Board are set out in section 59 of the County Governments Act and relate to public officers in the county public service. The powers do not extend to include and cover the governor, deputy governor, members of the county executive committee and the members of the county assembly.
Broadly, a County Public Service Board is, responsible for:
Establishing and abolishing offices in the county public service;
Appointing persons to hold or act in those offices, and confirming appointments;
Providing for the organization, staffing and functioning of the county public service in ways that ensure efficient, quality and productive services for the people of the county,
Advising the county government on human resource development and management and utilization that best enhances service delivery by county public service institutions;
Providing for human resource management and career development practices to address staff shortages and barriers to staff mobility
Facilitating the development of coherent, integrated human resource planning and budgeting for personnel emoluments in counties;
Making recommendations to the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, on behalf of the county governments, on the remuneration, pensions and gratuities for county public service employees; and
Exercising disciplinary control over and removing persons holding or acting in those offices;
The CPSBs responsibility is also to promote, in the county public service, the values and principles set out in Articles 10 and 232 of the Constitution. They evaluate and report to the county assemblies on the extent to which the values and principles are complied with in the county public service and provide standards to promote ethical conduct and professionalism in county public service. Further, CPSBs advise county governments on implementation and monitoring of the county performance management systems and prepare regular reports for submission to the county assemblies on the execution of the functions of the Boards.
1.3 Vision
To be a benchmark for a high performing, dynamic and ethical public service in Baringo County
1.4 Mission
To transform the county public service to become professional, efficient and effective for the realization of county and national development goals.
2.0 County Public Service Board Governance
2.1 Board Governance Structure
Baringo County Public Service Board (CPSB) came into inception in early August  2013 but did not start operations until 1st of September  2013. The Board is comprised of the following members:
Mark Suge                  Chair          BA (UON), Dip BM (Isreal), MSc. (HR) (UK).
Grace Chelagat            V-Chair      BBA, PGD (HR) (MOI), Dip PM, MBA (UG)
Dr. Peter C Moindi     Member      B Pham, (UON) MBA (CON) (Egerton) .
Luka K Keter (HSC)   Member      Dip Ed (KSTC), B Ed (UG), MBA (CON) (Egerton),TSC.
Rebbecca A Lomongh   Member   BEd (Science) (MOI), M Phil (MOI)
Lenongonop C Lesiaman              Member            BSc (UoN), PGDE (UoN), MBA(CON) (UON), TSC.
Nicholas Chepkoiwo     Sec/CEO  BCom (UoN), MBA (UON), PhD (CON) (UoN), CPA(K), CPS(K), ICPAK, ICSPK.
2.2   Board Committees
The Board currently has four committees which facilitates efficient and effective decision making. The Committees are:
(1) Administration and Policy Committee 
(2) Discipline and Performance Committee
(3) Promotion of  National  Values  and Principles Committee
(4) Recruitment, Selection and Training Committee
The committees are supported by a secretariat comprising senior HR Officer and two(2) assistants  who assist in administrative services and data management.
2.3   Commencement of work
On assumption of office on 1st September, 2013, the Board faced a number of challenges and constraints. The  Board  lacked basic facilities including:
Its own budgetary allocation was  insufficient in some key areas ie purchase of vehicles ,training, promotion of national values and principles to fully meet its operations. It therefore focused more on recruitment activities at that time. 
Lack of a fully established secretariat impeded the Board's smooth operation. Going forward, this area will be strengthened  to improve service delivery to the County Public Service.
Office accommodation—At the beginning, the Board members, including the Chairperson, were for about three and half months accommodated in one room sharing office equipment such as computers with other County public officers due to inadequacy of office space and equipment. This made the Board's work  difficult especially when it commenced interviews. The Board managed to secure space at  the  Kenya School of Government where it is still operating to-date. The Board is currently searching for better office space in town and it is hopefully that in the next few months, members will find better and more humble office accommodation.
3.  Accomplishments by the County  Public Service Board for the year ending 31st December, 2014.
 INITIAL HUMAN RESOURCE CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
When it assumed office in 2013, the Board took the first step to familiarize itself with the structural and functional operations of the County. The Board was also appraised by the outgoing HR TA team on the existing County public service human resource capacity, skills status and gaps  against the people requirements of the County Integrated Development Plan delivery.
The Board expected to be fully inducted and given an overview of the structures and operations at the County by the Transition Authority. In particular, it was hoped that the Transition Authority would share with the Board what they had done and agree on the way forward. This never happened. However, the Board managed to capacity built itself through various fora such as Public service Commission, National Public Service Board forums, Directorate   of Public Service Management and by benchmarking .The Board found that the County was operating on very thin structures and lack sufficient skills, expertise and experience in critical areas such as in lands, finance management,  Human Resource Management,  infrastructure  and in the Health Sector. The Board then took steps to provide resources in those area through recruitment.
ACHIEVEMENTS
The following were specific  accomplishments of  the Board as at 31st December, 2014:
3.1 Recruitment
Pursuant to section 59(1)(b) of the County Government Act, the Country Public Service Board is mandated to appoint persons to hold or act in offices of the county public service. The county public service Board has so far recruited a total of 202 staff from the date of its formation distributed in different cadres across the various departments in the County. The recruitment was done competitively and ensured compliance in all the processes right from advertisement to appointment as required under the law.
The Staff recruited in to the County Government as of December 2014

Year/Quarter


No. Recruited


As at 3–6–2014-Cummulated


186


Quarter 1—July to September, 2014


16


Quarter 2—October to December, 2014


0


Total Recruited from July, 2013 to-date (31–12–2014)


202

NB. The above recruitments excludes the recruitment of 1,856 ECDE teachers in the month March, 2014.
3.2 Training
 The role of the County Public Service Board entails ensuring that necessary frameworks including committee and training budgets are in place in the public service departments for training programmers to succeed as per the county public service HR manual. We wish to confirm that the public service has complied to the provision in the County Government Act.
As part of up-skilling employees to improve service delivery to the people of Baringo,  the Public Service has so far trained 2,387 staff on various courses relevant to their jobs.
3.3 Developed Policies
Pursuant to section 59(1)(i) of the County Government Act, the County Public Service Board is mandated to advise the county government on the implementation and monitoring of the national performance management systems in the counties. To this end, the County Public Service Board has drafted the following policies and are before the Executive Committee for approval. Some of the policies have already been approved by the CEC and are in use.
(i)       Human Resource Management Policy - Awaiting approval
(ii)     Performance Appraisal Policy & Tool - Approved
(iii)    Probation Policy and Tool - Approved
(iv)    Training Policy - Awaiting approval
(v)     Recruitment Policy - Awaiting  approval
(vi)    Disciplinary Policy and the grievance handling procedure - Awaiting approval.
(vii)  Leave Policy-Awaiting approval
 The Board is currently awaiting the Executive to accelerate the approval of the same in order to facilitate implementation by the County Public Service. In the meantime, the County Public Service is using existing policies and guidelines published by the Public Service Commission of Kenya.
3.4 Performance Contracting/Appraisal
 This Policy has been deployed very well up to the level of Chief Officers. It includes a tool on Staff Performance Target Setting and Appraisal policy. The Board expects the Executive to ensure its implementation right down the Organization to drive  performance culture in the County. The Board has already engaged the Executive to provide  a plan for its implementation this quarter. It is crucial that each and every employee of Baringo County Government is working on a set of performance targets agreed with their supervisors to ensure service is delivered across all the sectors of Government as per their service charters. Failure to do this will result in sub optimal performance and poor and unco-ordinated service to the people and at a cost high to the Government.   
3.5 Probation Policy Implementation
The Board also developed a tool that was adopted by the CEC and deployed by the County Public Service in order to use in assessing staff on probation. The Board is expecting to receive performance assessment reports of  all the newly appointed staff before their confirmation in to service.
3.6 Promotion of National Values and Principles
Pursuant to article 10 and article 232  of the  Constitution of Kenya 2010, the County public service board is mandated to facilitate the promotion of the National Values and principles in the County and advise the county government on the implementation and monitoring of the National values and principles in the county.
3.6.1 Activities planned in achieving the objective of Promotion of National Values
In implementing the above provision on national values and Principles the County Public Service Board has carried out  the following activities:
A sensitization programme was created involving all the county Department Directors, Ward and Town Administrators, and all Sub-County departmental Heads. The Programme was rolled out and completed in the month of December, 2014.
 
SNo.
Promotion of National values and  principles of governance
Measures taken toward realization of national values and principles of governance (Quantitative and qualitative) policies, laws, strategies, programs, activities, directives and budgets
Progress  achieved in the realization of the national values and principles of governances (Quantitative and qualitative assessment ) (desegregated by age, gender, ethnic origin urban/rural population, county and other relevant status, on an annual comparative basis over the past year)
Challenges (internal and external)
Recommendation/ plans for the future
1
National unity, patriotism, justice,  Integrity,   professionalism and Sustainable development 
Recruitment was done across the reflection of the national diversity as per article 10 of the constitution.
95 officers out of the targeted 123 officers were reached.
1. Most of the advert made do not attract people from outside the county
1. Getting more partners to support the training so as to reach more staff by end of May 2015 .
Sensitization was done across all the six sub counties targeting all the administrators and departmental heads.
2. few who have been appointed declined the appointments
2.Capturing and meeting the 30% rule.
 
3.trainning all the staff requires a lot of resouces.
 
2
Good governance, transparency and  accountability
Advertisement of all jobs in the county is done through the media.
The board has recruited  two hundred and two competitively sourced employees into the public service taking note of the representation of gender, people with disability and minority
Mode of the adverts made by the board may not rich the targeted groups in remote areas.
Improving the county infrastructures.
Training has be done to the public officers and staff on Good overnance, transparency and accountability
 
3
Public participation and democracy of the people
Participation in the budget  preparation , prioritization of projects, CIDP, etc
A high percentage of the citizens are now aware of their right to participate in these activities.
Access to print media is still a challenge to many particularly in the rural population.
Sensitization is needed to improve gender balance in participation.
Few women do participate in such public awareness and more is needed to enlighten them.
4
Equity, inclusiveness, fairness and protection of the marginalized groups
Employment done based on regional balancing considering the  wards and sub-counties.
The recruitment was done towards regional balancing in the County. 
Some skills are not readily available in some sub counties while it appears to be more available in others. This creates a balancing and equity challenge.
Encourage more education and training in all of the sub counties in missing skills to ensure the right skill availability in future. 
3.6.2 Violation of Values and Principles
As at date of this report (31st December,2014), there were no reported cases on the violation of national  values and principles in the County.
3.6.3 County Public Service Board Work-plans
The Board  finalized its annual work plan(2014-2015) and is currently doing its 5 year strategic plan. The Strategic plan is developed in order to actualize the County HR Master plan for the 5 year period in order to achieve the objectives envisaged in the County Integrated Development Plan(CIDP) .
3.6.4  County Structures
The Board finalized the  draft County Structures for all the 10 departments in the county in August 2014. While the Board was preparing to present the same for discussion at the CEC, the Transition Authority announced it was carrying out a national institutional review exercise for all counties on what was called the Capacity Assessment Review for Public Service (CARPS).
 The output of this exercise will be a full report that will guide county governments in respect to the right organization structures that they should have, the number of employees they should engage, the set of skills and knowledge gaps if any . The exercise will also attempt to match people skills and jobs based on their qualifications, skills and experiences captured through the biometric exercise to create alignment. The report will also be recommending actions on remuneration harmonization in the counties.
In view of above, the Board is awaiting this report in order to harmonize the two recommendations on structures to come up with the best fit County department structures. This will then be agreed at the CEC for further action.
4. Challenges Faced and Proposed Solutions
The County Public Service Board encountered several challenges in the course of its operations. The following is a summarized  list of challenges  faced by the Board :

 


Challenge 


Description  of the Challenge


Mitigation of the Challenge


1.


Budget constraint


The County Public Service Board was initially given a predetermined budget which was very  conservative compared to the Boards needs. The subsequent budgets have been based on this wrong baseline which was earlier under budgeted.


The Board is currently preparing its budget for the year 2015/16 with the view of reversing the anomaly. We are optimistic that the concerned persons will accept the Board's proposal. This will enable the Board achieve its projected objectives  as stipulated in its annual Operation plan and most importantly its Constitutional mandate.


2.


Balancing in employment


 Pursuant to section 65(1)(e) of county government act, the County Public Service board is required to ensure  that  at  least  thirty  percent  of  the  vacant  posts  at  entry  level  are  filled  by candidates who are not from the dominant ethnic  community in the county. This has paused a challenge to the Board due to lack of candidates from those ethnic communities applying for vacant positions with all the requisite qualifications.


The Board has developed a framework where all advertised positions are forwarded to the ward levels for purpose of ensuring a wider reach of the citizens in the county.
In some instances, the Board has gone out of its way to lower the entry requirements for specific areas in the county in order to allow candidates with some basic qualifications participate e.g. in Health, & finance in order to see the face of the county.  


3.


Disability threshold


Out of the total applications received, the Board noted that  few applicants with disability cases applied for jobs. What is good is that most had good qualifications and were competitive enough to be taken. For example, the Board absorbed 3 candidates as administrators and is considering another for policing authority.


The Board will now develop a policy on Affirmative Action to ensure among other things that the County creates a data base for all people with disabilities in the County that may match our present and future job profiles for  consideration when opportunities arise. That they will also be reached when required for job interviews.


4.


Work culture among county employees


The County government  is with employees with three different types of backgrounds  namely:
(i)   The employees from the devolved national ministries (referred to as seconded) - still think they belong to national government and loyalty is to national government
(ii) The employees from the defunct Local Authorities—largely casuals, contracts and needing up-skilling to match current service delivery challenges. 
(iii)           New recruited employees  after the formation of the County Government - fresh,  highly skilled and in strategic positions.
Considering the varying backgrounds of the above employees, it is evident that  each type of employees operates within the framework of the inherited culture thereby causing culture differential in the county which eventually affect service delivery. The groups appear to operate in  'silos' or 'us and them' mindset.


The Board  recommended  that public service to infuse new talent and institute performance systems within the county in order to realign mindsets, behaviours and performance objectives.
This is the reason why the County public service Board initiated performance appraisal policy in order to change the prevailing culture to the desired culture of high and ONE performance.
The Board also is developing strategies of developing team culture among all the employees in the county through targeted training.
Culture change and Leadership trainings will also be necessary to build one team focused on one objective.
It is therefore critical that the Executive and the County Assembly agree on a good training budget for the County for the next 3 years to support a massive training agenda align to Performance Contracting.


5


Staff establishment


The Board continue to receive a large number of requests for recruitment of more staff from departments.  The problem at the moment is that the wage bill can no longer sustainably support more recruitment.


The Board in liaising with Treasury  has controlled recruitment  through the maintenance of the provided thresholds in the PFM Act of 30/70 per cent ratio. The Board is very keen on the wage bill sustainability. However, the Board is advising that there is need for the Executive to come up with a bill and law that will guide wage, development and recurrent financial allocations in the County to ensure the County is financially sustainable and able to pay salaries in future.

5. Conclusion and Way Forward
It is evident that much has been done by the County Public Service Board to deliver on its constitutional mandate through recruitment, training and performance management among others. A lot  more still need to be done in the coming months especially in creating the ONE team culture in the county, a team that is constantly focused and energized and doing one thing i.e. creating more and high performance in the county, holding themselves and others  accountable for their performance, we will be delivering more on training and more awareness on National Values and Principles as well as on Leadership and Integrity training and audit. 
Above all, a good budget is required otherwise the interventions will remain a dream. The County Public Service has been sensitized sufficiently enough on this need and they will be presenting a strong budget to the Assembly for consideration and the Board would like to make an advance appeal that the training budget request be considered with above in mind.
Working with the Transition Authority and the Executive, the Board will also agree the county's optimal structure in order to ensure wage bill sustainability.
In conclusion, the County Public Service Board is  grateful for the support it has received from all our stakeholders in undertaking our mandate. We are grateful to the support given to us by the office of the Governor, the Labor and Welfare Committee of the County Assembly, other related County Assembly Committees, Office of the County Secretary and Human Resource Management, our host the Kenya School of Government and others we may not have mentioned.
 The Board reiterates its resolve to continue offering services to the County within its mandate and as per the oath the members took.  We will keep our working relations with all parties concerned as we also expect reciprocity in the same.
NICHOLAS CHEPKOIWO,
Secretary/CEO,
MR/7268739                                   County Public Service Board.  

