
				Page: 976GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2752
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NYERI
DEPARTMENT REORGANIZATION
IN EXERCISE of powers conferred by section 30 (2) (e) and (l) of the County Governments Act, 2012 of the County Governments Act, 2012 I, Nderitu Gachagua, Governor County Government of Nyeri for the purposes of strengthening the mechanisms of service delivery to the people of Nyeri wish to make the following changes:
The service delivery units (Departments) are reduced from ten (10) to nine (9).
The Department of Public Administration, Information and Communication is hereby moved to the Governor’s Office under the leadership of the Deputy Governor.
The functions previously performed under the Department of Gender, Culture and Social Development will henceforth be absorbed under a new Department called Special Programs which will be headed by the County Executive Member formerly in charge of Public Administration. This docket will be responsible for matters relating to Youth, Sports, Marginalized Groups and Gender.
The Chief Officer in the abolished Department of Gender moves to this new Department.
The function of Culture moves to the Department of Trade, Industrialization and Tourism.
The current Executive Secretary for Agriculture, Livestock and Cooperatives Development is relieved of his duties and in his place, the Executive Secretary for Health in an acting capacity take over the responsibilities of the said Department.
The function of Cooperatives Development is moved to the Department of Trade, Industrialization and Tourism while the Directorates of Fisheries and Livestock are combined into one Directorate.
The function of Sanitation is moved from the Department of Water, Environment and Natural Resources to the Department Health Services.
The Directorate of Revenue moves from the Department of Finance and Economic Planning to the Department of Public Administration, Information and Communication. Further that the Department of Finance and Economic Planning is reorganized to combine both Finance and Economic Planning under one Chief Officer.
Dated the 8th April, 2015.
NDERITU GACHAGUA,
MR/7056982                   Governor, County Government of Nyeri.

