
				Page: 996GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2762
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CHANGE OF USER AND DEVELOPMENT OF CREST APARTMENTS ON PLOT L.R. NO. MOMBASA/BLOCK XXVI/157, KIZINGO AREA, MOMBASA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kizingo Crest Limited) is proposing to construct Crest Apartments to be located on plot L.R. No. Mombasa/Block XXVI/157, in Kizingo area of Mombasa County.
The proposed project involves the construction, subsequent occupation and possible decommissioning of residential apartments and auxiliary amenities, christened Crest Apartments that will feature two but combined towers at different floor elevations. Tower one will rise from ground to 15th floor in tandem with tower two which will then be constructed for a further 9 floors to attain a maximum height of 24 floors. At completion the project will have 67 apartments designed to cover 44% of the plot area i.e. 0.872 acres.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:


Environmental and Social impacts


Mitigation measure


Occupational health and safety of wrkers


The contractor will provide workers with appropriate Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) and ensure their use.
Workers to be trained on equipment use.
 First aid facilities to be available on site.
Contractor to comply with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) by registering the site as a work place.
All visitors to the site to be provided with PPEs.


Solid wastes at construction site


Procure the services of a NEMA licensed waste handler to manage solid wastes from the construction site.
All recyclable materials should be collected and sent to a licensed company for recycling.


Increased demand for water for construction use


The contractor will ensure prudential use of water resources during construction by avoiding wastage such as running pipes and taps.
The proponent should meter and monitor the water yields from the borehole on a monthly basis.


Air pollution


Contractor to deploy fine dust screens at the project site during construction.
Sprinkle dust producing materials such as ballast with water during offloading on site.
The contractor has retained sediment binding grass within the site to mitigate against dust generation by vehicles delivering raw materials on site.
Use serviceable machinery and vehicles for supply of raw materials.


Noise pollution


Delivery of raw materials to site to be done only during the day.
No delivery of raw materials should be undertaken during weekends.
Workers on site should be provided with earmuffs to attenuate high noise levels associated with concrete mixing machines, hoists and lift installations during casting works.
Use of serviceable vehicles and machinery is also expected to reduce noise levels.


Insecurity


Proponent and contractor to vet all workers on site.
Require certificates of good conduct from potential employees and copies of identification documents for all workers to be retained by the contractor.


Speed and neighborhood safety concerns


Erect speed limit signage along Mwamba Avenue.
Compel drivers to comply with recommended speeds.
The proponent could also consult with KURA to erect one or two speed bumps which oshould be clearly marked with the appropriate signage.


Air emissions


Contract to use only serviceable trucks for transportation to and from the site.
Trucks and vehicles to be switched off when idling on site or during offloading of raw materials.


Noise concerns


Contractor to use only serviceable trucks for transportation to and from the site.
Trucks and vehicles to be switched off when idling on site or during offloading of raw materials.


Solid waste generation


Provide litter bins that encourage the separation of wastes into paper, glass, plastics etc. for recycling.
Contract a NEMA licensed solid waste handler to manage wastes from the development.
Comply with Legal Notice No. 121 of 2006 in management of solid wastes generated by the development.


Increase in electricity demand


Apply to KPLC to obtain a higher capacity transformer for the area to accommodate the new development within the national grid.
The overhead cables traversing the site will be replaced with a suitable capacity underground cable.


Firefighting


A fire safety guide to be provided to all tenants.
Firefighting equipment such as extinguishers and water to be provided.


Traffic increase and congestion on Mwamba Avenue


The development will provide for acceleration and de-acceleration lanes for traffic to and from the apartments.
The development should be serviced by two gates instead of one and provide dedicated entry and exist lanes.
The entrance to the development will be truncated to ensure that vehicles waiting to access the gate do not stop along the road but within the truncation.


The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7407274           National Environment Management Authority.

