
				Page: 3042GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 9524
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF KITUI
COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
REPORT ON THE EXTENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE NATIONAL VALUES AND PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNANCE IN THE KITUI COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE
BOARD MEMBERS
The Board has perpetual succession and is capable of suing and be sued under its corporate name. The Kitui County Public Service Board is composed of the following:
Rose K. Masya—Chairperson
Patrice M. Ivuti—Vice-Chairman
Naomi M. Mangatu (Dr.)—Member
Salim B. Shaabani—Member
Bridget M. Mutemi—Member
Samuel M. Ikima—Member
Japheth M. Muthengi—Ag.BS
FOREWORD
The Kitui County Public Service Board is established under section 57 of the County Governments Act No. 17 of 2012.
The County Public Service Board is required, under Section 59 (1) (f) of the County Government Act 2012, to evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service.
Under the Constitution, the public service has specific obligations whose objective is to provide a solid base for the effective and efficient delivery of public services. One of these foundations is expressed in terms of the values and principles as mentioned in Articles 10 and 232 of the Constitution. The evaluation on the extent to which the public service has complied with these values and principles provides a mechanism for confirming the progress realized in the fulfillment of the obligations.
The report has analysed the current situation for the values and principles and the actions taken by the Board to increase the levels of compliance. Findings in this evaluation report show that, during the 2014/15 and 2015/16 Financial Years, considerable levels of compliance have been realised.
While the County has made great strides in improvement of levels of compliance with values and principles, there is still much more to be done. The Board would wish to request for the cooperation of various arms of the County Government in the promotion of values and principles.
I take this opportunity to thank The County Executive, with the leadership of H.E the Governor, and the County Assembly for their concerted efforts in inculcating a culture of continuous improvement on the extent of compliance with values and principles in the County Government of Kitui.
ROSE K. MASYA (MRS.) ,
Chairperson, Kitui County Public Service Board.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report is developed in fulfillment of the constitutional requirement where the County Public Service Board is required to evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service.
In its evaluation process, the Board considered what had been done, the current status and the required actions for the improvement on compliance with values and principles. The evaluation was based on available documentation from all the County Departments and Ministries , internal records of the County Public Board and physical checks.
The report is developed in four major parts. The first part looks at the establishment, functions and powers of the Board with a special emphasis on its role in the promotion of Values and principles in the County Public Service.
The second and main body on the report is on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 of the constitution have been complied with in the County Public Service. 
This section of the report gives a situational analysis and actions taken in the promotion of the values and principles.
The third section reports on the impediments in the promotion of values and principles and the fourth is on planned values and principles promotional programs. The report also provides recommendations which could enhance the promotion of values and principles in the County Government of Kitui.
CHAPTER ONE
 INTRODUCTION – THE PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
The Kitui County Public Service Board is a body corporate established under Section 57 of the County Governments Act, 2012. This is the actualization of Article 235 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010, which gave the County Governments the task of: (a) Establishing and abolishing offices in the County Public Service; (b) Appointing persons to hold or act in offices of the County Public Service and confirming appointments; (c) Exercising disciplinary control over, and removing, persons holding or acting in the offices provided for under this part.
MANDATE AND CORE FUNCTIONS
The functions of the County Public Service Board as provided under section 59 (1) of the County Governments Act No 17 of 2012 are, on behalf of the County Government, to:
(a)Establish and abolish offices in the County Public Service;
(b)Appoint persons to hold or act in offices of the County Public Service including in the Boards of cities and urban areas within the County and to confirm appointments;
(c) Exercise disciplinary control over, and remove, persons holding or acting in those offices as provided for under this part;
(d) Prepare regular reports for submission to the County Assembly on the execution of the functions of the Board;
(e) Promote in the County Public Service the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 of the Constitution;
(f)  Evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service;
(g)Facilitate the development of coherent, integrated human resource planning and budgeting for personnel emoluments in counties;
(h)Advise the County Government on human resource management and development;
(i)  Advise County Governments on implementation and monitoring of the national performance management system in counties;
(j)  Make recommendations to the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, on behalf of the County Government, on the remuneration, pensions and gratuities for county public service employees.
VISION
A values driven, efficient and effective County public service
MISSION
To appoint qualified and competent County human resource, and promote high standards of professional ethics and accountability for excellent public service delivery
CORE VALUES
Teamwork
Respect
Integrity
Professionalism
Powers of the Board in the Promotion of Values and Principles
In the performance of its functions under Section 59 (1) (e) of the County Governments Act 2012, the County Public Service Board has powers to:
(a)    Inform and educate County public officers and the public about the Values and Principles;
(a)    Recommend to the County Government effective measures to promote the Values and Principles;
(b)    Assist County Government in the formulation and implementation of programmes intended to inculcate in public officers the duty to uphold the values and principles;
(c)    Advise the County Governments on their obligations under international treaties and conventions on good governance in the county public service;
(d)    Visit any county public office or body with a view to assessing and inspecting the status of compliance with the values and principles;
(e)    Investigate, on its own initiative or upon a complaint made by any person or group of persons, the violation of any values and principles;
(f)     Recommend to the relevant lawful authority, any necessary action in view of the violation of the values and principles by any person or public body;
(g)    Cooperate with other institutions working in the field of good governance in the public service; and
(h)    Perform any other functions as the Board considers necessary for the promotion of the values and principles.
According to Section 59 (1) (f) of the County Government Act, 2012, the County Public Service Board is expected evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service. This report therefore focuses on this particular function of the board.
National Values and Principles of Governance
As provided for under Article 10 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010, the National Values and Principles of Governance include:
(a)         Patriotism, national unity, sharing and devolution of power, the rule of law, democracy and participation of the people;
(b)         Human dignity, equity, social justice, inclusiveness, equality, human rights, non-discrimination and protection of marginalised;
(c)Good governance, integrity, transparency and accountability; and
(d)         Sustainable development.
Values and Principles of Public Service
Values and principles of public service as set out in Article 232 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010 are—
(a)High standards of professional ethics;
(b)Efficient, effective and economic use of resources;
(c) Responsive, prompt, effective, impartial and equitable provision of services;
(d)Involvement of people in the process of policy making,
(e) Accountability for administrative acts;
(f)  Transparency and provision to the public of timely, accurate information;
(g)Subject to paragraphs (h) and (i), fair competition and merit as the basis of appointments and promotions;
(h)Representation of Kenya’s diverse communities; and
(i)  Affording adequate and equal opportunities for appointment, training and advancement, at all levels of the public service, of-
(i)    Men and women;
(ii)   The members of all ethnic groups; and
(iii)   Persons with disabilities.
CHAPTER TWO
2.0 THE EXTENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH VALUES AND PRINCIPLES
2.1 BACKGROUND
This report is provided pursuant to Section 59 (1) (f) of the County Government Act 2012 which requires the County Public Service
Board to evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service.
2.2 THE EXTENT OF COMPLIANCE: ARTICLE 10: NATIONAL VALUES AND PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNANCE
2.2.1 Patriotism, National Unity, Sharing and Devolution of Power, the Rule of Law, Democracy and Participation of the People
2.2.1.1 Situation Analysis
During the recruitment process, the Board discovered that a number of candidates did not comprehend the content and significance of the National anthem and elements of National unity as per the Second Schedule of the Constitution of Kenya 2010.  Noted also was that majority of the County Public Service officers were not conversant with the Constitution and other laws relevant to their areas of operations. Further, the County Government was unable to effectively perform its devolved functions because some of the devolved units had not been fully operationalised. These included Sub counties, Towns wards and villages.
2.2.1.2 Action Taken
To address the issue of poor comprehension of the National anthem, The Board incorporated questions on the same in the interview process to excite interest in the content and significance of the National anthem and elements of National unity as per the Second Schedule of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. County colours and symbols are being incorporated in all official County documents and signage. Several County offices are hoisting the National and the County flags.
The Board uploaded the constitution and other relevant laws, and continues to upload newly enacted laws relating to Values and principles of Public Service to County Website and has drawn the attention of the County employees to the same. Additionally, the Board formally conducted sensitisation workshops where employees were exposed to relevant laws and their application.
The Board has recruited and is still in the process of strengthening the internal capacities of the Sub County, Town, and Ward administration units. Following the enactment of the Kitui County Villages Act, 2015, The Board has embarked on the process of recruiting the village administrators.
Democracy and Participation of the People has been and continues to be realised through policy formulation forums; the Education Forums, investor conference, and many other stakeholder consultative meetings on development, Cultural events such as beauty pageants, County Integrated development plan, youth forums, women forums etc.
2.2.2 Human dignity, equity, social justice, inclusiveness, equality, human rights, non- discrimination and protection of the marginalised
 2.2.2.1 Situation Analysis
Assessment on the Compliance regarding Human dignity, equity, social justice, inclusiveness, equality, human rights, non-discrimination and protection of the marginalised was done.  It was found out that various offices in the county did not have ablution blocks for convenience, those in existence were in a poor state and unlabelled by gender.
Analysis of records of county public service was done. It established that the legal requirements for youth and gender in appointments had been met; however, there was need for concerted effort to address the requirements for Persons living with disability, and the marginalised.
  2.2.2.2   Action Taken
     (a)   The County Government embarked on construction of ablution blocks in public places like markets, schools, offices, bus parks to ensure that Kitui County is open defecation free, and ensure a healthy environment and also protect the human dignity.
     (b)   The Board has continued to monitor compliance and ensure the ratio of male to female employees meets the constitutional threshold.
     (c)   The Board has continued to advertise opportunities for job vacancies in order to reach all and allow for fair competition.
     (d)   Affirmative action is being undertaken to address the disadvantaged groups of people such as minority groups in the County e.g. The Tharaka, Arab, Somali, Muslim minorities, persons living with disabilities, youth and women.
2.2.3 Good Governance, Integrity, Transparency and Accountability
2.2.3.1                Situation Analysis
The County Ministries had developed organisational structures at the beginning of the year; however, they had not developed service charters.  There were also no effective mechanisms for monitoring integrity, transparency and accountability.
2.2.3.2     Action Taken
The Board and all County ministries have, with the assistance of a consultant drawn organisational structure to streamline the processes for making and implementing decisions. Additionally, performance contracts were developed and signed by Senior County public service officers to ensure accountability. The Board has already developed its strategic plan and service charter. Most ministries are also in the process of developing service charters. Further, suggestion boxes were procured and placed in strategic places for purposes of reporting issues on integrity in the administrative acts of officers, as well as providing feedback on service delivery.
In order to enhance transparency and accountability, the County Government published and distributed booklets highlighting all the development projects undertaken in each of the forty wards, including the cost of each project.
2.2.4 Sustainable Development
2.2.4.1   Situation analysis
Kitui County Integrated Development plan (KCIDP) had been developed highlighting development needs of the County. The development projects contained in this document had been evaluated and considered based on their sustainability. Based on the above, the projects initiated are viable and sustainable. Since KCIDP is a medium term plan, there was need to develop a long-term vision for the County.
2.2.4.1   Action taken
The County Continues to implement projects in compliance with the KCIDP.
The County through public participation designed a ten year economic blueprint named Kitui Vision for Economic and Social Transformation (KIVEST) fashioned on the National Vision 2030. The main objective of KIVEST is to provide a long term planning framework to guide socio-economic, political and environmental development in Kitui County.
The County Government trained local artisans and local entrepreneurs to empower them to participate in implementation of development projects. Further, the local communities are involved in development projects through Ward Development Committees to ensure prioritization, ownership and management of those projects for sustainability purposes. All projects undertaken had been budgeted for and assessed to be financially feasible.
2.3 ARTICLE 232: VALUES AND PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC SERVICE
2.3.1 High Standards of Professional Ethics
2.3.1.1   Situation Analysis
This was evaluated on the basis of four indicators, namely, code of conduct and ethics for officers in the public service; training for skills development; membership to professional bodies and declaration of income, assets and liabilities.
 Indicators recorded a low level of compliance with professional ethics. The County Public Service Board realized that the public service comprised officers drawn from different backgrounds with different organizational and work culture.
Major cases of indiscipline were reported to the Public Service Board.
2.3.1.2    Action taken
The Board embarked on major sensitisation programme on Values and principles of public service aimed at creating awareness on the same, development of teamwork and improvement of service delivery
and overall culture change in the public service.  This was done in the eight Sub-Counties and the Human Resource department.
The Board additionally uploaded the constitution and other relevant laws, and continues to upload newly enacted laws relating to Values and principles of Public Service to County Website and has drawn the attention of the County employees to the same.  This increased access to knowledge on the officers’ professionalism.
The Board undertook suitability tests and continues to do the same for various cadres for proper placement of staff and quality service delivery.
Training approvals for officers working in the Ministry of Health and Sanitation were granted in order to ensure competence in the performance of their duties.
Various trainings have been held in the county including induction of staff, training on the filling of Asset Declaration forms, training on job evaluation, performance contracting among others.
2.3.2 Responsive, prompt, effective, impartial and   equitable provision of services
2.3.2.1 Situation Analysis
The Board established that service delivery was below required standards as a result of officers being drawn from diverse organisational culture and work ethics.
2.3.2.2    Action taken
The Board embarked on major sensitisation programme on Values and principles of public service aimed at transformative leadership, development of teamwork and improvement of service delivery and overall culture change in the public service.  
County Ministries are in the process of developing service charters. The County is host to Huduma Centre where some County Services are integrated and services provided under one roof.  The County Government has also complied with the use of Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS), where all financial transactions are processed using the system. This has enhanced the speed of service delivery.
The Board is undertaking mystery shopping to assess the quality of services offered by the County Public Service.
2.3.3. Fair competition and merit as the basis of appointments and promotions
2.3.3.1 Situation Analysis
Appointments and promotions were and continue to be guided by meritocracy and fair competition. They are also guided by other legal provisions such as the need to include communities not adequately represented in appointments to or promotions in the public service, the balance of gender; consideration of minority ethnic groups; and persons living with disabilities.
As at 30th November, 2015, the County Public Service Board had employed a total of 301 female officers representing 37 % of the total staff appointed. The male appointed officers were 512, representing 67 %.  The County Public Service Board has engaged a total of 11 persons living with disabilities. The Board has enhanced its recruitment process to adequately capture data on persons living with disability. The Board continues to encourage them to apply for advertised positions, and also register with the Association for persons living with disability.
CHAPTER THREE:
IMPEDIMENTS IN THE PROMOTION OF VALUES AND PRINCIPLES
The Board encountered various challenges in ensuring these values are upheld. These include:
     (a)   Apathy in appreciation of ICT among the County employees which makes most employees unable to access the documents uploaded in the County Website as well as using modern technology for research and communication;
     (b)   Kitui County has low internet connectivity, making the offices especially those working outside the County Headquarters unable to communicate and access internet;
     (a)   Lack of public awareness on the role of citizens in governance and therefore low citizen participation in development;
     (b)   Inadequate knowledge on the constitutional provisions on devolution and other relevant legislations among public officers;
     (c)   Inadequate budgetary allocation to enhance the promotion of values and principles;
     (d)   Officers from outside the county requesting for inter-county transfers and declining positions in Kitui owing to the vastness of the county, Semi-arid climate, insecurity, the difficult terrain thus defeating efforts towards patriotism and national unity.
     (e)   Persons with Disability and other special groups not applying for positions in the County while those that apply fail to indicate this status.
CHAPTER FOUR:
 PLANNED PROGRAMS IN UNDERTAKING PROMOTION OF VALUES AND PRINCIPLES
        1.            Develop, produce and distribute IEC Material on Values and Principles in Kitui County.
        2.            Continue Sensitising public service on Values & Principles.
        3.            Monitor compliance with the values & principles.
        4.            Advise the County Government on its obligations under international treaties and  conventions on need basis.
        5.            Finalise the staffing of the devolved offices.
CHAPTER FIVE:
RECOMMENDATIONS
The Board recommends the following:
     (a)   Provision to the Board of adequate budgetary allocation to carry out activities that enhance promotion of Values and Principles, as well as compliance monitoring.
     (b)   Partnering with the County Assembly for public awareness creation on the role of citizens in governance and the need for full participation in development agenda and activities and employment creation.
     (c)   Facilitation in creation of an enabling environment for the exploitation of natural resources to create jobs for Kitui County residents.
CONCLUSION
The County Public Service registered substantial levels of compliance with the Values and Principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. However, so much still needs to be done to increase the compliance levels. The Board would wish that facilitation, financial and otherwise, be made available to drive the agenda on high compliance levels with values and principles.
The Board appreciates the cooperation accorded by the H.E. the Governor, the County Secretary, Chief Officers and Sub County Administrators during evaluation of the extent to which values and principles have been complied with in Kitui County Public Service.
Further, the Board appreciates the Members of the Kitui County Assembly for the oversight role and the advice given from time to time on ensuring compliance with the values and principles.
REFERENCES
The Constitution of Kenya 2010.
The County Governments Acts, Number 17 of 2012.
Public Service (Values and Principles Act) 2015.
Kitui County Integrated Development.
(MR/8448649)

