
				Page: 1046GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1894
THE WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT ACT, 2013
(No. 47 of 2013)
MARSABIT FOREST ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT PLAN,2015-2025
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 44 (3) of the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act, 2013, the Cabinet Secretary for Environment, Natural Resources and Regional Development Authorities gazettes the Plan in the Schedule hereto.
Schedule
MARSABIT FOREST ECOSYSTEM MANAGEMENT PLAN, 2015–2025
The Marsabit Forest Ecosystem Management Plan (hereinafter referred to as "the Plan") defines the principles and strategies that Marsabit forest stakeholders have designed to address forest and wildlife conservation, tourism development, and community livelihood issues in the Marsabit Forest Ecosystem. The Ecosystem covers two protected areas; the Marsabit National Reserve and the Marsabit Forest Reserve and adjacent community land within ten kilometres from the Marsabit National Reserve boundary.
The Plan emphasises that all the developments within the Marsabit Forest Ecosystem shall be in accordance with the Plan. The Plan is a dynamic document that shall be subject to periodic reviews, depending on emerging issues and new knowledge.
The success of this Plan hinges on stakeholders’ commitment to follow through with implementation of activities outlined in this Plan. Therefore, to facilitate Plan implementation, Marsabit Forest Ecosystem Management Plan Implementation Committee (hereinafter referred to as “the Committee”) shall be formed to co-ordinate and oversee the implementation of the Plan. The committee shall be an advisory body comprising representatives from Kenya Forest Service, Kenya Wildlife Service, County Government of Marsabit and other Government and non-governmental agencies co-opted by these three organizations. The committee shall meet regularly to review progress in Plan implementation and make adjustments needed to enhance achievement of Marsabit Forest Ecosystem’s management objectives. The committee will be chaired jointly by the Kenya Wildlife Service senior warden, Marsabit and the Kenya Forest Service Marsabit Ecosystem conservator. Progress in Plan implementation will be communicated with other relevant stakeholders with enough frequency to ensure that the Plan remains a living document.
The committee shall perform the following functions—
(a)    co-ordinate the implementation of the Plan;
(b)    mobilize resources for Plan implementation;
(c)    monitor and evaluate the progress of activities;
(d)    identify constraints in Plan implementation;
(e)    produce annual progress reports on Plan implementation; and
(f)     recommend review of the management Plan.
The Plan addresses threats to Marsabit Forest Ecosystem’s conservation values through the following major policy and management intervention measures—
(a)    a moratorium on consumptive use of natural resources in the Marsabit Forest Reserve and Marsabit National Reserve shall be maintained during the ten year Plan duration;
(b)    the zoning scheme outlined in the Plan shall be implemented; and
(c)    five management programmes shall be implemented to achieve the Marsabit Forest Ecosystem  management objectives.
The Plan’s zoning scheme and management programmes are outlined in the following sections 

