
				Page: 1079GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2003
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED REHABILITATION AND AUGMENTATION OF KIAMBERE – MWINGI WATER AND SANITATION PROJECT, KITUI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Tanathi Water Services Board has proposed phase II of the Kiambere Mwingi Water supply and Sanitation Project which has two main components; (a) water component which entails the rehabilitation and augmentation of the Kiambere Mwingi Water Supply and (b) the sanitation component will encompass the construction of sewerage system and waste water management plant in Mwingi Town. The project will support the construction of two sites. The first one is the construction of a sewerage system and a subsequent waste water treatment plant located in Tyaa (Site A) and the other one in Kivou (Site B). Both sewerage plants are expected to be capable of handling a capacity of 2,500m3/day. The capacity for Kivou Site will be of 1,000m3/day and the site at Tyaa will be of 1500m 3/day.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Potential impact


Proposed mitigation measures


Risks of improper  handling of sludge


Include construction of  anaerobic digesters as  an option in tender documents.
Design and implement  lime dosing system for raising pH to 12 for 2 hours and 11.5 or 2 days.

 

 


Provide workers with PPE.


 


Analyze sludge and  decide accordingly  whether the sludge.
could be used in agriculture and how it  is going to be applied.


 


Disposal of unused  sludge in suitable dumpsite.


Risks associated with disposal of final effluent


Proper designs.
Preventive maintenance of structures andequipment.

 

Unacceptable odours  
 


Maintain high efficiency of biological treatment and lime application.


 


Provide buffer zones  around the WWTP to cause minimum odour impacts.
Establish communication with  neighbouring areas.

 

Risks of handling hazardous substances
 


Design precautions of  chlorine building.
Empty chlorine cylinders and lab chemicals containers to be returned to vendors.

 

Risks of sewers clogging


Design and installation of engineered solids/oil separators.
Regular inspection and cleaning of solids/oils.

 

 


Cleaning and flushing of gravity sewers


Risks of sewage leakage to clean water pipes


Ensure integrity of  pipes before operation.


 


Prompt response to leakage.


Risk of improper management of solid  wastes


Prepare schedule for  solids and oils removal  from household separation unit.


Effects on cesspit evacuation business


Provide awareness to private contractors about other business opportunities.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kitui County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8808192         National Environment Management Authority.

