
				Page: 1079GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2004
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED KAPSOYA TREATMENT WORKS AND ELLEGERINI PIPELINE UASIN GISHU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent Lake Victoria North Water Services Board. The proposed new water intake is Ellengerini Dam located in about 15km from Kapsoya. An intake will be developed though no physical changes to the dam structure. A total of 9,000m3/day will be abstracted to provide 2,000m3/day for the proposed new Naiberi Water Treatment Works and 7,000m3/day for Kapsoya Treatment Works. The proposed main water treatment works is an existing plant located at Kapsoya comprising 1No. Storage 5,000m3 tank and 2No. storage 200m3 tanks is designed for
3,450m3/day production. A new water treatment works and an elevated tank will be installed at Naiberi to supply the residents in Naiberi, Duka Moja, Muslim Centre and other adjoining areas. About 2,000m3/day will be made available for treatment at this new facility.
Other components of the proposed project works will include:
(a) Raw Water Gravity Main DN400 mm, length 4.4 km transmitting 9,000m3/d from the
(b) Ellegirini Dam to Naiberi Water Treatment Works,
(c)  New High Level Treatment Works at Naiberi with a capacity of 2,000m3/d,
(d) Raw Water Gravity Main DN350 mm, length 11.9Km transmitting 7,000m³/d from Ellegerini Dam to Kapsoya Treatment Works,
(e)  Rehabilitation of Kapsoya Treatment Works to original design capacity of 3,500m3/d.
(f)   Expansion of Kapsoya Treatment Works by 3,500m3/d to a total capacity of 7,000m3/d,
(g) New Distribution Network for the High Level Zone of diameters varying from DN50-DN150 and total length 22Km.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
Project Activity and Issues
Key Impacts
Management Action Plans and Responsibilities
·      Preparatory Activities
·      Social conflicts.
·      Give prior notification to the community on expected disruptive activities related to the project, e.g. temporary displacements and access roads.
·      Site Surveys
·      Loss of trees and ground cover.
·      Involvement of Administration Office in (The Assistance County Commissioners and Chiefs) and ELDOWAS for order.
·      Setting up construction camp site(s)
·      Delivery of construction materials to the work areas.
 
·      Setting up materials holding sites
 
 
·      Preliminary rehabilitation activities
·      Potential temporary disruption of project affected persons along the road reserve.
·      Preparation and implementation temporary displacement plan.
·      Site clearing
 
·      Creation of awareness to the affected persons on temporary disruptions.
·      Engaging affected people along the pipeline corridors for co-operation
 
 
·      Site clearing
·      Limited loss of riverine vegetation at the intake and water treatment works.
·      Confine vegetation clearing to the required sites only
·      Vegetation removal for the intake site
·      Potential limited local disruption of riverine bio-diversity in at Kaptagat forest area.
·      Ensure proper disposal of waste generated (vegetation/trees species).
·      Clearing the transmission pipeline
·      Temporary siltation to the water Ellegrini River downstream.
·      Ensure minimal interference with the surface drains along transmission pipelines.
 
·      Cumulative siltation of the Two Rivers Dam. 
 
 
·      Water pollution (increased turbidity).
 
 
·      Siltation of surface drainage sections.
 
·      Construction Works and related components 
·      Air pollution (exhaust and dust emissions).
·      Construction to be carried out during dry seasons to the extent possible.
 
·      Potential soil erosion and siltation to downstream water.
·      Sprinkle water on the excavated sections to abate dust emissions.
·      Earth moving
·      Oil spills from contractors machinery.
·      Practice soil control measures(terracing).
·       
·      Potential threat to safety of the workers.
·      Limit construction works to day time.
·      Construction Works and related components 
·      Risk to safety of the residents, e.g. access routes and grazing areas).
·      Ensure adequate provision of the personal protective equipment.
 
·      Possible intrusion to the local residents privacy by construction workers.
·      Ensure regular maintenance of contractors machineries and vehicles.
·      Social interactions
·      Possible immigration into the project area by construction workforce.
·      Provide adequate signage and reflective tapes for restricted zones.
 
 
 
·      Construction Works and related components 
·      Opportunities for employment to the local youth.
·      Provide opportunities for local labour (upto 60%).
 
·      Opportunity for locally available construction supplies.
·      Enhance benefits from supplies procurements to the local communities.
·      Economic Issues
 
 
·      Water Supply Operations
·      Disruption of access of water by the local communities.
·      Come up with guidelines regarding water connections and use.
 
·      Potential water wastage and loss along the transmission lines.
·      Sensitize the water users on sustainable water use.
 
·      Potential uneven distribution of water,
·      Collaborate with other players in the region on sanitation, health and hygiene awareness creation. 
 
·      Illegal water abstraction through illegal connections.
 
·      Water use trends
·      Illegal water vending (especially if obtained from the water supply).
 
·      Accountability
 
 
·      Sustainability and equity 
 
 
 
 
 
·      Water Supply Operations
·      Potential contamination from construction activities.
·      Ensure regular water quality monitoring and maintenance of the water supply system.
 
·      Risks from water borne diseases and vectors thrive.
·      Influence the land-use activities in the catchment areas,.
 
·      Potential water pollution from the water source and transmission pipeline corridors.
·      Creation of awareness on water resource management and conservation.
 
 
 
·      Health and Sanitation
 
 
·      Water Supply Operations
·      Potential injuries to the operators and visitors,
·      Maintain a fence around the water intake and treatment areas with provision for limited and/or controlled access to the unauthorized persons.
 
·      Safety risks to settlements along the transmission pipeline (pipe bursts and leakages).
·      Enhance close surveillance by the community, especially those living near the system main tanks. 
·      User Safety and risks downstream,
 
·      Sensitize the communities on safety issues associated with the water storage tanks.
 
 
 
·      Water Supply Operations
·      Creation of employment to locals.
·      Sensitization on water resource management and conservation.
·      Social and economic issues,
·      Introduction of new economic activities in the service area.
·      Local communities should also participate in water resource management and planning.
·      Downstream dependants,
·      Potential illegal water connections.
·      Impose heavy penalties on illegal water connection and vandalism.
·      Water use trends and accountability,
·      Potential vandalism of water pipelines infrastructure.
 
·      Facility Ownership
·      Potential wastage of water and leakages at consumer points.
 
·      Water loss and wastage
 
 
·      Water Supply Operations,
·      Potential non-compliance with water abstraction regulations.
·      Comply to the provisions of the Water Resources Management Authority.
 
·      Natural Resources Utilization.
·      Organize communities for effective and sustainable utilization of natural resources associated with the water supply system.
·      Institutional Aspects
·      Water use linkages among the beneficiary communities.
·      Establish a specific monitoring system for the water supply scheme.
 
 
·      Urgently initiate a task to address the security and safety of the water sources including Ellegerini Dam such as to covers;
 
 
·      Delineating all the Dam Boundaries and secure the same,
 
 
·      Fence-off all dam areas and water installations and keep off free access by authorized persons,
 
 
·      Collaborate with other authorities on social and economic activities within the dams and other water sources (residential premises, industrial operations, agricultural activities, etc.)
 
 
·      Establish a detailed risk assessment and effective preventive measures for all public water supply installations.
·      Catchments’ Management 
·      Enhanced vegetation cover in the immediate zones of the Ellegrini River catchment.
·      Immediate landowners to be motivated into maintaining buffer zones along the river and the intake facility,
·      Pollution control 
·      Pollution from agricultural activities including agro-chemicals.
·      Collaborate in guiding landowners towards changing their land use practices including mode of agricultural and irrigation methods as well as application of agrochemicals.
·      Soil erosion control and reduced silt transportation
·      Loss of vegetation from the catchment.
·      Collaborate on afforestation programmes of slopes and other steep sections of the watershed area in collaboration with landowners,
·      Leadership in tree planting of the catchment areas.
·      Influenced sanitation trends in the riparian homesteads within the Ellegerini dam neighbourhoods.
·      Contribute to an integrate Land Use Management Plan, Pesticides Control Management Plan and a Water Use Plan. 
 
·      Silt interception in the catchment.
 
·      Decommissioning 
·      Removal of construction sites (stores, toilets, waste dumps, etc.).
·      The contractor to prepare a decommissioning plan of all construction installations and associated sited at least 3 months prior to end of construction.
 
·      Removal of construction residual material holding sites.
 
 
·      Disposal effects of wastes and construction debris.
 
 
·      Remove part of all of the water intake and sedimentation tank.
·      Notify NEMA at least one year before the intention to decommission.
 
·      Removal of part or all of the water treatment plants.
·      Undertake a decommissioning audit at least six months before the activity and provide a decommissioning plan,
 
·      Removal of the transmission pipeline.
·      Undertake the decommissioning following the decommissioning plan and under supervision by NEMA,
 
·      Demolition of the water distribution tanks.
·      Rehabilitate the affected locations to the satisfaction of NEMA and other stakeholders.
 
 
 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kitui County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8858037                                                                                                                         National Environment Management Authority.

