
				Page: 1049GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1895
THE WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT ACT,
(No. 47 of 2013)
KISITE-MPUNGUTI MARINE PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT PLAN,2015-2025
IN EXCERCISE of the powers conferred by section 44(3) of the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act, 2013, the Cabinet Secretary for Environment, Natural Resources and Regional Development Authorities gazettes the Plan in the Schedule hereto.
Schedule
The Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area Management Plan (hereinafter referred to as “the Plan”) defines the principles and strategies that stakeholders of the Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area have designed to address conservation, tourism development and management, community livelihood issues, and protected area administrative issues in the Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area. The Marine Protected Area covers two protected areas, Kisite Marine National Park and Mpunguti Marine National Reserve, and adjacent public and community land.
The Plan emphasises that all activities within the Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area shall be in accordance with the Plan and the Wildlife Conservation and Management Act, 2013.
The Plan is a dynamic document that shall be subject to periodic reviews, depending on emerging issues and new knowledge.
The success of this plan hinges on stakeholders’ commitment to follow through with implementation of activities outlined in this plan. Therefore, to facilitate plan implementation, a Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area Management Committee (hereinafter “the committee”) shall be formed to co-ordinate and oversee the implementation of the Plan. The committee shall be an advisory body comprising representatives from Kenya Wildlife Service, tourism stakeholders, community representatives, security agents, researchers, County Government of Kwale, and other relevant Government and non-governmental agencies. The committee shall meet regularly to review progress in plan implementation and make adjustments needed to enhance achievement of Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area’s management objectives. The committee shall be chaired by the Warden, Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area. Progress in plan implementation will be communicated with other relevant stakeholders with enough frequency to ensure that the plan remains a living document.
The committee shall perform the following functions—
(a)    co-ordinate the implementation of the Plan;
(b)    mobilize resources for Plan implementation;
(c)    monitor and evaluate the progress of activities;
(d)    identify constraints in plan implementation;
(e)    produce annual progress reports on plan implementation; and
(f)     recommend review of the management plan.
The Plan addresses threats to Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area’s conservation values through the following major policy and management intervention measures—
(a)    strengthening co-management of Mpunguti Marine National Reserve;
(b)    implementing the Zoning scheme outlined in the Plan; and
(c)    implementing management actions under the five management programmes.
The Plan’s zoning scheme and management programmes are outlined in the following sections—
1. Zoning Scheme
The Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area’s zoning scheme seeks to support the regulation and promotion of allowable uses across the area and to reconcile different types and intensity of use in different parts of the Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area.
To achieve this, the Kisite-Mpunguti Marine Protected Area has been divided into four resource use zones (Core Protection Zone, Partially Protected Zone, Multiple Use Zone and Livelihood Intervention Zone). In addition, for tourism purposes the area has been divided into two visitor use zones (High Use Zone and Low Use Zone).
. Management Programmes
The Plan has five management programmes (Ecological Management Programme, Tourism Development and Management Programme, Fisheries Resource Management Programme, Community Partnership and Conservation Education Programme, and Marine Protected Area Operations and Security Management Programme). Each management programme contains management objectives that set out the future desired state that the Plan implementers aim to achieve, and a set of specific management actions to achieve these objectives. In addition, to facilitate plan implementation, each management programme has a three year Activity Plan, which breaks down the individual management actions into day-to-day management activities.
2.1 Ecological Management Programme
The plan seeks to protect and restore rare, endemic or threatened species, maintain marine ecosystems in a healthy functioning state, and understand and appreciate the marine biodiversity. This shall be achieved through implementation of the following actions 

