
				Page: 2888GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7543
THE PRIVATIZATION ACT (No. 2 of2005)
TRANSFER OF 26% KWA HOLDINGS E.A. LIMITED SHARES TO DISTELL LIMITED
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 41 of the Privatization Act, 2005, and following the—
(a)   approval of the Privatization Programme by the Cabinet in 2008 and the publication of the Privatization Programme in Gazette Notice No. 8739 of 2009;
(b)   approval of the privatization proposal for KWA Holdings E.A. Limited by the Cabinet and the National Assembly in November, 2011 and January, 2013, respectively, and the subsequent publication in the Standard Newspaper and the Daily Nation Newspaper on the 5th April, 2013 and on the 12th April 2013, respectively;
(c) completion of the approved negotiations between Distell Limited and the Privatization Commission;
(d)   publication of the notice of proposed transfer of shares in KWA Holdings E.A. Limited to Distell Limited in Gazette Notice No. 4892 of 2014 dated the 18th July, 2014;
(e)   signing of the Share Purchase Agreement by Industrial and Commercial Development Corporation, KWA Holdings E.A. Limited and Distell Limited on the 29th August, 2014; and
(f)    countersigning of the Share Purchase Agreement by the Cabinet Secretary for the National Treasury on the 29th of August, 2014,
the Privatization Commission gives noticc of the Privatization of the KWA Holdings E.A. Limited in which—
(a)   the privatization is by way of transfer of twenty six per centum (26%) of the issued share capital of KWA Holdings E.A. Limited from the shares held by Industrial and Commercial Development Corporation comprising twenty four million nine hundred and sixty thousand class A ordinary shares of five shillings each (hereinafter referred to as the "Sale Shares");
(b)   the privatization transaction is the sale of the Sale Shares through a negotiated and market driven process whereby Distell Limited signed a long term supply agreement with the Kenya Wine Agencies Limited, which is a subsidiary Company of KWA Holdings E.A. Limited, by which Kenya Wine Agencies Limited has been granted exclusive rights for the sale of Distell products in Kenya and in the Region. The Agreements between Kenya Wine Agencies Limited and Distell Limited provide for—
(i)       an indefinite long term supply and distribution agreement between Distell Limited and the Kenya Wine Agencies Limited with a minimum lock in period of five years;
(ii)     an indefinite long term production and bottling agreement between Distell Limited and Kenya Wine Agencies Limited with a minimum lock in a period of five years; and
(iii)    modalities to extend the exclusivity to other countries in the region;
(c)   the name and address of the person to whom the Sale Shares are to be transferred is Distell Limited, Registration Number 1963/01333/06, of P.O. Box 184, whose registered office is Aan-de-Wagenweg 7599 Stellcnbosch South Africa,
(d)   the consideration to be paid to the Industrial and Commercial Development Corporation for the sale shares is Kenya shillings eight hundred and sixty million; and
(e)   following the transfer to Distell Limited and the implementation of the approved sale of four per centum (4%) shareholding to the members of staff of the KWA Holdings E.A. Limited, the government of Kenya shall continue to hold forty two point six five per centum (42.65%) of the issued capital of the KWA Holdings E.A. Limited, through the Industrial and Commercial Development Corporation.
By Order of the Board.
Dated the 14th October, 2014.
SOLOMON KITUNGU, Executive Director/CEO, Privatization Commission

