
				Page: 2888GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7542
TASK FORCE TO REVIEW MATTERS RELATING TO ADMINISTRATION OF FOREIGN EMPLOYMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF LABOUR MIGRATION
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for information of the general public that the Cabinet Secretary for Labour, Social Security and Services has appointed a Task Force consisting of the following:
Donald Kipkorir—(Chairman);
Members:
Francis Atwoli. Jacqueline Mugo (Ms.) Carol Kariuki (Ms.) Mohamud H. Ahmed Albert Mwendar Mike Oloitiptip Sonte Khadija A. Asman Scholastica Ndambuki (Ms.) Edith Okoki (Ms.)—(Secretary) Susan Wangui Wanjohi (Ms.)
Terms of Reference:
1. The terms of reference of the taskforce are to—
(a)  consider the existing framework for the management and regulation of recruitment agencies and assess its effectiveness in protecting Kenyans recruited to work outside the country;
(b)  analyze the possible reasons and underlying factors for—
(i) the increase in migration of Kenyan workers to the MiddleEast and the Gulf Region and;
(ii) the causes and extend of the increasing number of reported cases of mistreatment of Kenyan workers and unfair labour practices in the Middle East and the Gulf Region
(c)   review the existing framework and recommend how it can be strengthened to ensure effective protection of Kenyans working outside the country;
(d)   recommend considerations to be taken into account in vetting and accreditation of recruitment agencies;
(e)   recommend measures for effective co-ordination and regulation of recruitment agencies;
(f) develop a policy direction and advise the government on whether to maintain or lift the existing ban on export of Kenyan workers to the Middle East and the Gulf Region;
(g) consider any other matter related and incidental to the foregoing and make such recommendations as may be appropriate.
2. In the performance of its functions the Task Force -
(a)   shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the taskforce shall consider necessary for the proper discharge of its functions;
(b)   may co-opt any may possess such expertise necessary for the execution of the mandate of the Task Force;
(c)   may peruse any past reports on foreign employment and labour migration by other public or other agencies and recommend implementation strategies of their recommendations, if any;
(d)   shall make reports or updates, when necessary, to the Cabinet Secretary for Labour, Social Security and Services outlining any matters that may require urgent action;
(e)   shall receive views from members of the public and oral written submissions from any person with relevant information.
3. Powers
The task force shall have the power to regulate its own procedures.
4. Duration
The task Force shall complete its work and submit its final report to the Cabinet Secretary for Labour, Social Security and Services not later than three months from the date of its first appointment and the Cabinet Secretary may when necessary extend the period.
The Secretariat of the taskforce shall be based at the Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services. Submission from the public can be addressed to the Secretary, Taskforce to review matters relating to administration of foreign employment and management of labour migration P.O. Box 40326, Nairobi.
Dated the 15th October, 2014.
SAMWEL K. KAMBI,
Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Services

