
				Page: 1844GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5137
HIGH COURT OF KENYA AND COURTS
 WITH STATUS OF THE HIGH COURT
AUGUST VACATION, 2014
IN EXERCISE of the powers under Article 161(2)(a) of the Constitution, 2010, Section 5(2)(c) of the Judicial Service Act, and pursuant to Section 7 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, 2010, and Rule 2 of Legal Notice No 53 of 2013, the Chief Justice gives NOTICE  as follows:
The August Vacation of the High Court, the Environment and Land Court and the Industrial Court other than in the regions formerly within the Coast Province, shall commence on 01st August, 2014 and terminate on 15th September, 2014 both days inclusive. The August Vacation of those Courts in the regions formerly under the Coast Province shall commence on 01st August 2014 and terminate on 18th August, 2014 both days inclusive.
During this period, trials in criminal appeals will take place as usual. A Judge will hear urgent Civil Matters if admitted to hearing on application made in accordance with the Rules of the Court.
For avoidance of doubt, Vacation Duty Judges shall be appointed by the Resident Judges in liaison with the Principal Judge of the High Court, at court stations to hear and try matters arising during vacation in accordance with the High Court (Practice and Procedure) Rules, applicable mutatis mutandis, in the courts with status of the High Court.
In court stations with a single Judge, the matters emanating therefrom will be handled in the nearest High Court station where a vacation Judge is sitting pursuant to directions issued by the Principal Judge of the High Court.
During the vacation the offices of the aforesaid courts, including registries, shall be open to the public from 8.00am to 5.00pm on all weekdays other than public holidays.
All courts and offices of Chief Magistrate, Senior Principal Magistrate, Senior Resident Magistrate, Resident Magistrate and Kadhis Courts will be open during the usual working hours.
In all Subordinate Courts, Criminal cases will be heard as usual; as will Civil cases of an urgent nature or those in which advocates are not engaged.
Dated the 18th July, 2014.
WILLY MUTUNGA,
Chief Justice/President of the Supreme Court of Kenya.

