
				Page: 841GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3238
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OF BEACH OPERATORS TRADING STALLS ON SILVERSANDS BEACH ACCESS ROAD, MALINDI
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed development of beach operators trading stalls.
The proposed project will compromise of approximately 60 units. Each stall shall be 8 feet by 8 feet in area. The project comprises of two rows of stalls separated by 9m (30 feet) wide path way which shall be made of cabro works.
The proposed site is Malindi Silver Sands beach located 2.9 Kilometers southwest of Malindi town off Casuarina Road. The proposed site is located between the walls of Arabica residential beach house and Tropical Village Plan Hotel.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures

Possible impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Increase of wastes and poor house keeping
Air quality pollution


Ensure safety for the people and properties around the working area.
Dispose away the wastes to designated municipal garbage collection area.
Resurface/pave open areas after the completion of the project.
Provide suitable storm water drainage channels to effectively discharge water. to safe areas.


 


Use environmentally clean fuels for equipment in use which must be of sound working condition


Possible impacts 


Mitigation measures 


 


Provision of bill boards at the construction site notifying of the contractor on site, construction activity and timings.


Noise and vibration


Use locally available materials such as wood products that produce low noise when being fixed or cut.
Provision of protective clothing such as boots, overalls, helmets, goggles, earmuffs, masks, gloves is done.


Unfair allocation
Conflict amongst the locals


Allocation of stalls to rightful individuals.
Consideration should given to the current owners of the existing structures.
All categories of tourist related activities must be considered and allocated for at the most convenient stall arrangements.
All categories of the local people must be considered.
A consensus must be agreed upon with the hoteliers to avoid business related conflict of interest in terms of what they sell.


Overcrowding
Blockage of road access
Narrowing of the access roads


Space to be left for vehicle passage in case of emergency.
Adequate size and number of stalls to be done so as to accommodate the anticipated crowds especially during peak season.


Waste management


A reputable solid waste handler will be contracted to regularly collect solid waste for appropriate disposal.
Adequate provision of strategically placed waste bins to ensure that there is no idle litter.
The provision of a septic tank that will be exhausted promptly.
All waste pipes should be accessible from outside for inspection, cleaning and repair purposes.
Sanitary facilities should be kept clean always, through regular washing.
Good housekeeping


Fire safety


Training on fire safety.
Provide firefighting equipment and emergency response plan.
Potable firefighting equipment are located at strategic points.
A fully equipped first aid kit is provided.
Provide emergency numbers at strategic points.


Personnel accidents and occupational risks


The implementation of safety measures and emergency plans.
A fully equipped first aid kit is provided.
Provide emergency numbers at strategic points.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kapiti Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Coast Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Malindi District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR16623376       
 National Environment Management Authority.

