
				Page: 839GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3236
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL STATION ON PLOT L.R NO. GITHUNGURI/IKINU/1026, ALONG KIAMBU-GITHUNGURI ROAD
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed petrol station.
The project highlights include:
Canopy over the pumps
Sales office
A store
Underground fuel tanks
Compressor/generator
Tyre centre & car wash
Drive ways, walkways, acceleration and deceleration lanes
Interceptor Tank
Washrooms
The proposed project site is located directly opposite the poster for P.C.E.A. Ngagoti Church. It’s a triangular shaped plot measuring 0.06 ha. The Land reference number is L.R. No. GITHUNGURI/IKINU/ 1026 along Kiambu–Githunguri Road at Ikinu Shopping Centre.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Air pollution
 


Control speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Spray water on excavated areas.
Maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Sensitize construction workers.
All bare areas shall be landscaped after construction.
Workers shall be provided with dust masks if working in sensitive areas.


Noise pollution


Maintain plant equipment.
Construction shall be carried out only during daytime i.e. 0800 – 1700 HRS.
Workers to wear ear muffs if working in noisy section.
Management to ensure that noise from the residents is kept within reasonable levels.


Traffic density


Proper signage put in place to notify neighbours of the activity and presence of heavy vehicles and to direct traffic.
Presence of boards directing patrons to the site.
Strict adherence to traffic rules.


Soil erosion and compaction


Provide soils conservation structures on the areas prone to soil erosion to reduce impact of erosion.
There shall be designated pathways and driveways for movement within the compound to avoid unnecessary compaction.
All bare areas shall be well landscaped after completion.


Solid waste


Construction debris shall be collected by a licensed private contracted waste collection company.
Excavation waste shall be re-used or backfilled.
Waste generated shall be collected by a privately contracted waste collection company and the contractor shall ensure the construction of a central waste collection point with bulk storage facilities.
The site shall have waste receptacles with bulk storage facilities at convenient points to prevent littering during occupation.


Oil leaks and spills


Machinery shall be well maintained to prevent oil leaks.
Contractor shall have a designated area where maintenance is carried out and that is protected from rain water.
All oil products shall be stored in a site store and handled carefully.


Occupational health and safety


Provide Personal Protective Equipment
Train workers on personal safety and how to handle equipments and machines.
A well stocked first aid kit shall be maintained by a qualified personnel.
Report any accidents / incidences and treat and compensate affected workers.
Provide sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences which should be kept clean.


Possible impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Underground fuel storage and handling
 


Use properly maintained hoses and fittings
Make the cement screeds in all the chambers using water proof material.
Install a monitoring well next to the tanks to check on leaks.
Use water finding dipstick and/ or a hydrometer to check on density/ specific gravity.
Ensuring no spills during refilling and / or when offloading the fuel.


Fire preparedness


Fire fighting drills carried out regularly.
Fire fighting emergency response plan.
Ensure all firefighting equipment is regularly maintained, serviced and inspected.
Fire hazard signs and directions to emergency exit, route to follow and assembly point in case of any fire incidence.


Environmental health and safety


Train workers on personal safety and disaster preparedness.
A well stocked first aid kit shall be maintained by a qualified personnel.
Report any accidents / incidences and treat and compensate affected workers.
Provide sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences which shall be kept clean.
Conduct Annual Health and Safety Audits.


Waste water disposal


Waste water shall empty to the septic tank via well laid sewage pipes.
Conduct inspections for sewer pipe blockages or damages and fix them.
Empty septic tank whenever its full by a licensed exhauster services.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kapiti Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Central Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Kiambu West District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1662057                                                                                 National Environment Management Authority.

