
				Page: 840GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3237
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT
FOR THE PROPOSED SERVICED APARTMENTS ON PLOTS L.R NO. MN/1/3095 & MN/1/3191 IN NYALI, MOMBASA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, the National Environment Management Authority, (NEMA) has received an environmental impact assessment study report for the implementation of the proposed serviced apartments.
The proposed project will comprise of executive apartments: 20 two-bedroomed and 20 three-bedroomed apartment units occupying five floors, a swimming pool, basement parking for 40 cars, while the other facilities consist of executive rooms, a swimming pool, meeting rooms, Gym, Health club, salon and bar.
The proposed site is located on plots L.R. No. MN/1/3095 and MN/1/3191 in Nyali Area, Mombasa County. The parcels of land are situated along Fourth Avenue off Baobab Road which is off the main Mombasa/ Malindi Road.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Soil erosion


Control earthworks.
Install drainage structures properly.
Ensure management of excavation activities.


Air pollution


Stockpiles of earth should be sprayed with water or cover during dry seasons.
Provide dust masks for the personnel in dust generation areas.
Sensitize construction workers.


Noise pollution


Sensitize workforce including drivers of construction vehicles.
Install sound barriers for pile driving activity.
Install portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationary equipment where necessary.
Put up signs to indicate construction activities.
Maintain all equipments.
Workers to be provided with noise to wear safety and protective gear.


Dust generation


Spray stock piles of earth with water.
Avoid pouring dust materials from elevated areas to ground.
Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand and other loose materials.
Provide dust screen where necessary.


Exhaust emissions


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized.
Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible.
Equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.


Water sources


Management of water usage. Avoid unnecessary wastage of water.
Avail storage tanks.
Harvesting of rain water.


Site cleanliness and sanitary facilities


Special attention shall be paid to the sanitary facilities on site.
Garbage shall be disposed off periodically.


Road safety


Road signs on main roads.
Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles.


Public health and occupational safety


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.


 


Ensure dustbin cubicles are protected from animals, rains and are well covered.


 


Proper handling and disposal of solid waste.


Possible impacts 


Mitigation measures 


 


Provide suitable safety gear for all personnel.


 


Proper treatment of waste water.


Vegetation


Landscape the site by planting grass an trees at all disturbed areas.
Care for the trees/plants.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Kapiti Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c)  Provincial Director of Environment, Coast Province.
(d) District Environment Officer, Mombasa District.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the approval process of the project.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR1662024                                                                                 National Environment Management Authority.

