
				Page: 2255GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  6953
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT
AUTHORITY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED 60MW WIND POWER PROJECT LOCATED IN KITHIMA, MUGAE AND KIRWIRO SUB LOCATIONS OF RWARERA LOCATION IN BUURI CONSTITUENCY IN MERU COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Maralal Energy Limited, intends to develop a 60MW Wind Power Project of electricity and supply to the National grid Rwarera Location in Meru County. The Project is located about 2KM off the Nanyuki–Isiolo Road in Buuri Constituency of Meru County in Kithima, Kirirwo and Mugae sub-locations of Rwarera Location. The project proponent will intend to use Model Suzlon 297 of the turbine Specifications.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Aspect


Mitigating Measures 


Dust


Excavate during off-peak hours of the wind movement.
Safety procedures.
Use of PPE.


Emissions (particulates, carbon dioxide and monoxide) from equipment such as bulldozers, graders


Use of respirator by workers.
Recondition engine exhaust systems.
Establish equipment inspection program.


Noise
 


Use of ear protectors.
Establish equipment inspection programme.


Electromagnetic Interference


Install coated turbines (nacelle insulation).


Aircraft safety  impacts


KCCA high restriction will be adhered to.


Spills of oil and other hazardous chemicals from construction equipment


Spill prevention procedures & response plan.
Concrete floor waterproofed.
Spill control kit.
Training.
Water site regularly.


Sewage disposal /overflow waste water disposal


Sewage and waste water to be discharged to septic tank.
Monitor level of septic tank and exhaust as necessary.


Solid waste disposal


Provide suitable solid waste containers.
Segregate and recycle solid waste use of a waste pit.


Oil, chemical and material spills


Spill control procedures.
Training.
Spill control kit.


Removal of soil and vegetation


Landscaping (grass, plants and flowers
Allow grazing in the wind farm.


Water usage


Apply to local authority for permit for abstraction.
Apply for temporary connection during construction.


Electricity usage


Apply to KPLC for connection.
Implement appropriate energy conservation measures.


Mortality of the bird species


Install bird scare on the tower to scare off the birds from perching.
Place visible markers including light at night to help birds avoid coming close to the turbines.


Grazing of animals


Allow access into the site for grazing.


Visual change


Landscaping (grass, plants and flowers
Creation of a buffer zone.
Installation of window awnings, or curtailing wind turbine operations when certain lighting conditions exist (Lantz, Wiser, and Hand, 2012)
Installation of coated turbines with low reflectivity.


Transportation  of
turbines  and
construction
materials to the site


  All vehicles delivering bulk material to the site not  to  exceed recommended  weight limit  and  comply  with traffic rules.
Use  of  signage  to control flow of traffic.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Meru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project. A copy of Environmental Assessment report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke and comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/8045782         National Environment Management Authority.

