
				Page: 2236GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  7135
THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY ACT
(No. 19 of 2012)
LEADERSHIP AND INTERIGTY CODE FOR STATE OFFICERS IN THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PURSUANT to the provisions of sections 37 and 39 of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012, the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology publishes the Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers in the Ministry.
COMMITMENT
This is a commitment made by State Officers in the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology to abide by the requirements of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012.
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
COR              Code of Regulations
EACC            Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission
LIA               Leadership and Integrity Act
MOEST         Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
POEA            Public Officer Ethics Act
SAGA           Semi-Autonomous Government Agency
UNESCO       United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
ARRANGEMENT OF THE CODE
Abbreviations and Acronyms
Preamble
PART I—PRELIMINARY
1—Citation.
2—Interpretation.
3—Application of Code.
4—Application of the Public Officer Ethics Act, 2003.
5—State Officers to sign Code.
PART II—REQUIREMENTS
6—Rule of Law.
7—Public trust.
8—Responsibility and duties.
9—Performance of duties.
10—Professionalism.
11—Financial Probity.
12—Moral and ethical requirements.
13—Gifts or benefits in Kind.
14—Wrongful or unlawful acquisition of property.
15—Conflict of interest.
16—Participation in tenders.
17—Public collections.
18—Bank accounts outside Kenya.
19—Acting for foreigners.
20—Care of property.
21—Misuse of official information.
22—Political neutrality.
23—Impartiality.
24—Giving of advice.
25—Gainful employment.
26—Offers of future employment.
27—Former State Officer acting in a government or public entity matter.
28—Misleading the public.
29—Falsification of records.
30—Conduct of private affairs.
31—Bullying.
32—Acting through others.
33—Reporting improper orders.
34—Confidentiality.
35—Duty to prevent occurrence of corruption or unethical practice in the Commission.
36—Promotion of ethics, integrity and best practices in the Commission.
37—Dress Code.
38—Implementation of the Code.
39—Review.
40—Breach of Code.
THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY ACT
(No. 19 of 2012)
Establishment of the Code
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 37 of the Leadership and Integrity Act (LIA), 2012, the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology establishes this Leadership and Integrity Code for the State Officers in the Ministry.
Preamble
This Code is established pursuant to Section 37 of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012 which requires every public entity to prescribe a Specific Leadership and Integrity Code for the State Officers in the entity. The Code is intended to establish standards of integrity and ethical conduct in the leadership of the Ministry by ensuring that the State Officers respect the values, principles and requirements of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 in the discharge of their duties.
Vision, mission, core values and functions of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MOEST)
Our Vision
“A global competitive education, training, research and innovation system for sustainable development”.
2. Our Mission
 “To provide, promote and co-ordinate quality education, training and research; and enhance integration of science, technology and innovation in sustainable national socio-economic development processes”
3.  Core Values
In pursuit of its mandate and in the running of its day-to-day operations, the Ministry is guided by the following values:-
(i)       Integrity
We are committed to honesty, always doing the right things    and upholding high moral principles.
(ii)     Courtesy
We are committed to treating colleagues and members of the public with respect.
(iii)    Professionalism
We are committed to the highest standards of professionalism.
(iv)    Accountability
We are committed to doing our work in a rational manner and taking responsibility for all our actions.
(v)     Teamwork
We are committed to working together and supporting one another in our efforts to achieve our goals and objectives.
(vi)    Diligence
We are committed to working together and supporting one another in our efforts to achieve our goals and objectives.
(vii)  Transparency
We are committed to operating in an atmosphere of openness and eliminating underhand transactions.
(viii) Fairness
We are committed to promoting equality and equity.
(ix)    Social responsibility
We are committed to making positive contribution towards national building. 
4. Core Functions
Emanating from our legislative mandate, our core functions are as follows:
Education Policy Management.
Management of Continuing Education.
Administration of Early Childhood Education, Standards and Norms.
Management of Education Standards.
Management of National Examinations and Certification.
Curriculum Development.
Quality Assurance in Educations.
Primary and Secondary Education Institutions Management.
Teacher Education and Management.
School Administration and Programmes Training Institutions.
Special Needs Education Management.
Representation of Kenya in UNESCO.
Adult Education Management.
University Education Policy Management.
University Education.
Public Universities and Tertiary Education.
Science, Technology and Innovation Policy.
Management of Technical Training Institutes including Youth Polytechnics.
Management of Institutes of Science and Technology.
Management of National Polytechnics.
Registration of Education and Training Institutions.
Promotion of Research, Science, Technology and Innovation
Research Authorization, Co-ordination, Inventory and Dissemination.
Supervision of SAGAs in the Sector.
PART I—PRELIMINARY
1. Citation
This Code may be cited as the Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers in the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology.
2.  Interpretation
In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Act” means the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012;
“Bank Account” has the meaning assigned to it under section 2 of the Act;
“Business Associate” means a person who does business with or on behalf of a State Officer and has express or implied authority from that State Officer;
“Code” means the Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers in the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology;
“Commission” means the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC);
“Ministry” means the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology;
“General Code” means the Code prescribed under Part II of the Act;
“Personal interest” means a matter in which a State officer has a direct or indirect pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest and includes the interest of his/her spouse, child, business associate or agent;
“Regulations” means the Regulations made by the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission pursuant to section 54 of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012;
“Spouse” means a wife or husband;
“State Officer” means a State Officer for the time being serving in the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology.
3. Application of the Code
This Code applies to State Officers of the Ministry of Education Science and Technology.
4. Application of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010; the Public Officer Ethics Act, 2003; Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012; and the Code of Regulations (COR), 2006.
(i)   The provisions of Chapter Six of the Constitution and the listed laws and regulations shall form part of this Code.
(ii) Commencement: This Code shall take effect on the date of publication in the Kenya Gazette.
5. State Officer to sign the Code
(i)   A State Officer shall sign and commit to this Code at the time of taking oath of office or within seven (7) days of assuming state office.
(ii) A serving State Officer shall sign and commit to this Code within seven (7) days of publication in the Kenya Gazette.
PART II—REQUIREMENTS
6.  Rule of Law
(1)     A State Officer shall respect and abide by the Constitution and the existing laws;
(2)     A State Officer shall carry out the duties of his/her office in accordance with the law;
(3)     In carrying out the duties of his/her office, a State Officer shall not violate the rights and fundamental freedoms of any person unless otherwise expressly provided for in the law and in accordance with Article 24 of the Constitution.
7.  Public trust
A State office is a position of public trust and the authority and responsibility vested in a State Officer shall be exercised in the best interest of the Ministry and the people of Kenya.
8.  Responsibility and duties
Subject to the Constitution and any other law, a State Officer shall take personal responsibility for the reasonably foreseeable consequences of any actions or omissions arising from the discharge of the duties of his/ her office.
9.  Performance of duties
A State officer shall, to the best of his/her ability—
(1) Carry out the duties of the office efficiently, effectively and with honesty;
(2) Carry out the duties of the office in a transparent and accountable manner;
(3) Keep accurate records and documents relating to the functions of the office; and
(4) Report truthfully on all matters related to the Ministry.
10.           Professionalism
A State officer shall—
(1) Carry out the duties of his/her office in a manner that maintains public confidence in the integrity of the office;
(2) Treat members of the public, staff and other State and Public Officers with courtesy and respect;
(3) Not discriminate against any person, except as is expressly provided by the law;
(4) To the extent appropriate to the office, maintain high standards of performance and level of professionalism with integrity within the Ministry; and
(5) If the State Officer is a member of a professional body, observe and subscribe to the ethical and professional requirements of that body in so far as the requirements do not contravene the Constitution, any other law or this Code.
11.           Financial Probity
(1) A State officer shall not use his or her office to unlawfully enrich himself/herself, family or any other person;
(2) Subject to Article 76(2)(b) of the Constitution, a State Officer shall not accept a personal loan or benefit which may compromise him/her in carrying out duties;
(3) A State Officer shall submit an initial declaration of assets and liabilities within thirty days of assuming office in the Ministry and thereafter bi-annually as per the requirements of the Public Officer Ethics Act;
(4) A State Officer shall not:
(a) Evade paying taxes.
(b) Neglect their financial obligations.
12.           Moral and ethical requirements
(1)   A State Officer shall observe and maintain the following ethical and moral requirements—
(a)    Demonstrate honesty in the conduct of his/her public and private affairs;
(b)   Not to engage in activities that amount to abuse of office;
(c)    Accurately and honestly represent information to the public;
(d)   Not engage in wrongful conduct in furtherance of personal benefit;
(e)    Not misuse public resources;
(f)    Not falsify any records;
(g)    Not sexually harass or have inappropriate sexual relations with other state officers, staff of the Ministry, client or a member of the public;
(h)   Not engage in actions which would lead to the State Officer’s removal from the membership of a professional body in accordance with the law; and
(i)    Not neglect family or parental obligations as provided for under any law.
13. Gifts or benefits in kind
(1)   A gift or donation given to a State Officer in a public or official occasion shall be treated as a gift or donation to the Ministry;
(2)   Notwithstanding subsection (1) above, a State Officer may receive a gift given to him/her in official capacity provided that—
(a)      The gift is within the ordinary bounds of propriety, a usual expression of courtesy or protocol and within the ordinary standards of hospitality;
(b)     The gift is non-monetary. Monetary gifts are strictly prohibited and should not be given or received.
(c)      The gift does not exceed a value of KSh. 20000.
(3)   A State Officer shall not—
(a) Accept or solicit gifts, hospitality or other benefits from a person who—
(i)       Is under investigation;
(ii)     Has a contractual relationship with the Ministry.
(iii)    Has any interest that is directly or indirectly connected with the State Officer’s duties;
(b) Receive a gift which has the potential of compromising his or her integrity, objectivity or impartiality;
(c) Accept any type of gift expressly prohibited under the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012.
(4) Subject to Section 13(2) of the Act, a State Officer who receives a gift or donation shall declare the gift/donation to the Ministry within fourteen days of receipt of the gift.
(5) The Ministry shall maintain a register of all gifts received by State Officers and dispose them of as provided for in the Regulations.
14.           Wrongful or unlawful acquisition of property
A State Officer shall not use the office to wrongfully or unlawfully acquire or influence the acquisition of property.
15.           Conflict of interest
(1) A State Officer shall use the best efforts to avoid being in a situation where his/her personal interests conflict or appear to conflict with the State Officer’s official duties.
(2) Without limiting the generality of Sub-section (1) above, a State Officer shall not hold shares or have any other interest in a corporation, partnership or other body, directly or through proxy, if holding those shares or having that interest would result in a conflict of the State Officer’s personal interests and the officer’s official duties.
(3) A State Officer whose personal interests conflict with their official duties shall declare the personal interests to the Ministry.
(4)      The Ministry may give directions on the appropriate action to be taken by the State Officer to avoid the conflict of interest and the State Officer shall comply with the directions; and refrain from participating in any deliberations with respect to the matter. Any direction issued by Ministry under this sub-section shall be in writing.
(5)      Notwithstanding any directions to the contrary under Sub-section (4) above, a State Officer shall not award or influence the award of a contract to—
(a) Himself or herself;
(b)      The State Officer’s spouse or child;
(c) A business associate or agent; or
(d)      A corporation, private company, partnership or other body in which the officer has a substantial or controlling interest.
(6)      Where a State Officer is present at a meeting, and an issue which is likely to result in a conflict of interest is to be discussed, the State Officer shall declare the interest at the beginning of the meeting or before the issue is deliberated upon.
(7)      A declaration of a conflict of interest under sub-section (6) shall be recorded in the minutes of that meeting.
(8)      The Ministry shall maintain a register of conflicts of interest in the prescribed form in which the affected State Officer shall register the particulars of the registrable interests, stating the nature and extent of the conflict.
(9)      For purposes of sub-section (8) above, the registrable interests shall include:-
(a) The interests set out in the Second Schedule of the Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012;
(b) Any connection with a person or a company, whether by relation, friendship, holding of shares or otherwise, which is subject of an investigation by the Ministry;
(c)     Any application for employment or other form of engagement with the Ministry, by a family member or friend of the State Officer or by a corporation associated with the State Officer;
(d) Any application to the Ministry, by a Family member or friend of the State Officer, for clearance with respect to appointment or election to any public office;
(e) Any other matter which, in the opinion of the State Officer, taking into account the circumstances thereof, is necessary for registration as a conflict of interest.
(10)    The Ministry shall keep the register of conflicts of interest for one performance year and submit copies of registered interests to EACC quarterly.
(11)    A State Officer shall ensure that an entry of registrable interests under sub-section (7) is updated and notify the Ministry of any changes in the registrable interests within one month of each change occurring.
16.           Participation in tenders issued by the Ministry
(1) A State Officer shall not participate in a tender for the supply goods or services to the Ministry.
(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) above, a company or entity associated with the State Officer shall not be construed as trading with the Ministry unless:-
(a) The State Officer has a controlling shareholding in the company or entity; or
(d) The State Officer is a Director of the Company.
17.           Public Collections
(1) A State Officer shall not solicit for contributions from the Ministry or any other person or entity for a public purpose unless the President has by notice in the Gazette, declared a national disaster and allowed a public collection for the purpose of the national disaster in accordance with the law;
(2)      A State Officer shall not participate in a public collection   of funds in a way that reflects adversely on that State Officer’s integrity, impartiality or interferes with the performance of the official duties.
(3)      Subject to sub-section (2) above, a State Officer may, with the approval of the Ministry, participate in a collection involving a private cause within the limits approved by the Ministry.
18. Bank Accounts outside Kenya
(1) Subject to Article 76(2) of the Constitution of Kenya or any other written law, a State Officer shall not open or continue to operate a bank account outside Kenya without the express approval of the Commission;
(2) A State Officer who has reasonable grounds for opening or operating a bank account outside Kenya shall apply to the Commission for approval to open or operate a bank account;
(3) A State Officer who operates or controls the operation of a bank account outside Kenya shall submit statements of the account annually to the Commission and authorize the Commission to verify the statements and any other relevant information from the foreign financial institution in which the account is held;
(4) Subject to sub-sections (1) and (2) above, a person who is appointed as a State Officer in the Ministry and has a bank account outside Kenya shall, upon such appointment, close the bank account within three months;
(5) Notwithstanding subsection (4), a State Officer who wishes to open or continue to operate a bank account outside Kenya shall within thirty days of becoming a State Officer submit an application to the Commission for approval.
19.           Acting for foreigners
(1) A State Officer shall not be an agent of, or further the interests of a foreign government, organization or individual in a manner that may be detrimental to the security interests of the country, except when acting in the course of official duty.
(2) For purposes of this Section:
(a) An individual is a foreigner if the individual is not a citizen of Kenya; and
(b)      An organization is foreign if it is established outside Kenya or is owned or controlled by a foreign government, organization or individual.
20. Care of property
(1) A State Officer shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the Ministry’s property in the officer’s custody, possession or control is taken care of and is in good repair and condition;
(2) A State officer shall not use the Ministry property, funds or services that are acquired in the course of or as a result of the official duties, for activities that are not related to the official work of the State Officer;
(3) A State Officer shall return all Ministry property in his/her custody, possession or control at the end of the appointment term or tour of the Ministry;
(3) A State Officer who contravenes sub-section (2) or (3) above shall, in addition to the penalties prescribed under the Constitution, the Act or any other law, be personally liable for any loss or damage to the Ministry’s property.
21.           Misuse of official information
(1) A State Officer shall not directly or indirectly use or allow any person under the officer’s authority to use any information obtained through or in connection with the office, which is not available in the public domain, for the furthering of any private interest, whether financial or otherwise.
(2) A State Officer shall not be deemed to violate the requirements of sub-section (1) above, if the information is to be used for the purposes of:-
(a) Furthering the interests of the Act; or
(b) Educational, research, literary, scientific or other purposes not prohibited by law.
22.           Political neutrality
(1) A State Officer shall not, in the performance of his/her duties—
(a)  Act as an agent of or further the interests of a political party or candidate in an election; or
(b) Manifest support for or opposition to any political party or candidate in an election.
(c)  Engage in any political activity that may compromise or be seen to compromise the political neutrality of the office subject to any laws relating to elections.
23.           Impartiality
A State Officer shall, at all times, carry out the duties of the office with impartiality and objectivity in accordance with Articles 10, 27, 73(2)(b) and 232 of the Constitution and shall not practice favouritism, nepotism, tribalism, cronyism, religious bias or engage in corrupt or unethical practices.
24. Giving of advice
A State Officer who has a duty to give advice shall give honest, accurate and impartial advice without fear or favour.
25. Gainful employment
(1) Subject to sub-section (2) below, a full time State Officer shall not participate in any other gainful employment.
(2) In this Section, “gainful employment” means work that a person can pursue and perform for money or other form of compensation or remuneration which is inherently incompatible with the responsibilities of the State Office or which results in the impairment of the judgement of the State Officer in the execution of the functions of the State Office, or results in a conflict of interest.
26. Offers of future employment
(1) A State Officer shall not allow himself or herself to be influenced in the performance of their duties by plans or expectations for or offers of future employment or benefits;
(2) A State Officer shall disclose, in writing, to the Ministry, all offers of future employment or benefits that could place the State Officer in a situation of conflict of interest.
27.           Misleading the public
A State Officer shall not knowingly give false or misleading information to a member of the public.
28.           Falsification of records
A State Officer shall not falsify any records or misrepresent information to the public.
29. Conduct of private affairs
A State Officer shall conduct their private affairs in a manner that maintains public confidence in the integrity of the office.
30. Bullying
(1) A State Officer shall not bully another State Officer, a member of staff or any other person; and
(2) For purposes of subsection (1) above, “bullying” includes repeated offensive behaviour which is vindictive, cruel, malicious or humiliating and is intended to undermine a person.
31.   Acting through others
(1) A State Officer shall not—
(a) Cause anything to be done through another person that would constitute a contravention of this Code, the Constitution or any other law if done by the State officer; or
(b) Allow or direct a person under their supervision or control to do anything that is in contravention of this Code, the Constitution or any other law.
(2) Sub-section (1) (b) above shall not apply where anything is done without the State Officer’s knowledge or consent or if the State Officer has taken reasonable steps to prevent it.
(3) A State Officer who acts under an unlawful direction shall be held responsible for his or her actions.
32. Reporting improper orders
(1) If a State Officer considers that anything required of them is in contravention of the Code or is otherwise improper or unethical, the State Officer shall report the matter to the Commission;
(2) The Commission shall investigate the report and take appropriate action.
33. Confidentiality
A State Officer shall not disclose or cause to be disclosed any information in his/her custody to any unauthorized person.
34. Duty to prevent occurrence of corruption or unethical practice in the Ministry.
A State Officer who believes or has reason to believe that a corrupt act or unethical malpractice has occurred or is about to occur in the Ministry shall take all necessary measures to prevent it from continuing or materializing in addition to any other appropriate action.
35. Promotion of ethics, integrity and best practices in the Ministry.
State Officers in the Ministry shall collectively and individually take measures to ensure that the staff of the Ministry uphold and practice the highest attainable degree of integrity in the performance of their duties.
36. Dress Code
A State Officer shall maintain appropriate standard of dress and personal hygiene at all times. Dressing that demeans the image of the Ministry will not be allowed.
37. Implementation of the Code
The Ministry shall be responsible for ensuring full implementation of this Code.
38. Review
The Code shall be reviewed at such intervals as the Ministry may determine subject to approval of the Commission.
39. Breach of Code
Breach of this Code amounts to misconduct for which the State Officer may be subjected to disciplinary proceedings including removal from office;
Where a breach of this Code amounts to a violation of the Constitution, the State Officer may be removed from office in accordance with Articles 152 and 155 of the Constitution;
(2) Subject to the Constitution, the Leadership and Integrity Act or the Regulations made for the enforcement of the Act or any other written law, a State Officer under investigation shall be suspended until the outcome of the investigations.
COMMITMENT TO THE CODE
l................................................................................................................
Holder of National ID/Passport No.............................................and Postal Box No.......................................... Code...........................having been appointed as........................................ in the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, do hereby confirm that I have read and understood the requirements of this Code and now do commit to faithfully uphold and abide by the provisions of the Code at all times.
Signed......................................................................................................
This day.....................................of.................................20......................
Witnessed by: .............................................................................
....................................................................................................
....................................................................................................
CABINET SECRETARY/PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Telegrams: “Education”, Nairobi
Jogoo House B
Harambee Avenue,
P.O. Box 30040–00100, Nairobi
Fax No. 254-2-214287
Telephone: 318581
E-mail: cs@scienceandtechnology.go.ke, ps@education.go.ke, ps@scienceandtechnology.go.ke
Form J                                                                            (r.35 (2))
COMMITMENT TO SPECIFIC LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE
 (Where the public entity has developed a specific code)
I……………………………………………………. Confirm that I have read and understood the specific Leadership and Integrity Code for ………………………………………………………………………
(Name of public entity) and hereby commit to abide by the Provisions of the Code.
Sworn at…………………………………………….. }
By the said……………………………………………………………Deponent 
This………..……… day of…………………..............…….20………}
Before me                                                                                                . }
Commissioner of Oaths / Magistrate                                   ..       }
Dated the 14th September, 2015.
JACOB T. KAIMENYI,
Cabinet Secretary.

