
				Page: 796GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1185
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED ATHI RIVER RETAIL CENTER MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT (COMMERCIAL / LEISURE AND RESIDENTIAL), WITHIN SOUTH OF NAIROBI, ALONG NAIROBI – NAMANGA ROAD, OFF MOMBASA ROAD, AT MAVOKO MUNICIPALITY IN MACHAKOS COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Stanlib Africa Direct Property Development Fund, is proposing Athi River Retail Center Mixed Use Development (Commercial / Leisure and Residential), within South of Nairobi, along Nairobi – Namanga Road, off Mombasa Road, at Mavoko Municipality in Machakos County. The proposed project, mixed use development of Athi River Mall will comprise of retail and commercial buildings consisting of anchor, fashion, financial, food / restaurants, furniture/electronics, health &beauty, line shops, children entertainment, modern offices and other services. The mall will consist of a basement, ground floor, first floor and a roof top.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures  


Impacts on biodiversity (flora, fauna, and soil characteristics)


Clearing vegetation only in construction areas and demarcating areas where no clearing will happen.
Implement good housekeeping practices such as solid waste management plan in order to prevent/minimize any sources of hazards to native flora and fauna.
Maintaining of landscaped gardens, terraces, conservation, and management of the vegetation and gardens.
Preservation of excavated top-soil for future site restoration procedures; particularly in highly disturbed areas.
Compacting areas with loose soil and providing structures for soil erosion control on steeper areas of the site and controlling activities during the rainy season.


Waste water


The internal and external waste management systems should be made of hard, strong, durable, smooth, impervious and non-corrodible materials. Similarly, all recycling measures will be in place to ensure reduction in the amount of waste water.
Wastewater generated will be channelled in the main sewer line.
Proponent will make sure that storm water channels are maintained regularly and lawn gradient is in place to assist in water flow.
Clearance of all tall grasses that may harbour vectors.
Regular spraying and treatment of green areas in the site to control vectors such as mosquitoes.
Reduce runoff by harvesting rain water. Create embankments to reduce runoff speed and re-vegetate the area.
Using materials that mimic natural percolation of water such as ballast on the parking lot.
Constructing proper drains and monitoring them to ensure there are no blockages. This also includes ensuring the size of the drains can accommodate storm flows during the rainy season.

Noise and vibration


All workers operating in noisy areas or operating noisy equipment will be provided with protective equipment (); such as, ear plugs to protect them against extreme noise.
Use of equipment designed with noise control elements will be adopted where necessary.
Construction works should be carried out only during daytime, e.g. from 0800 hrs. - 1700 hrs.
Provision of bill boards at the construction site gates notifying of the construction activity and timings.
Complying with the EMCA noise regulation of 2009 Legal Notice 61.


Air quality


Covering of all haulage vehicles carrying debris, sand, aggregate, and cement.
Stockpiles of fine materials should be wetted or covered with tarpaulin during windy conditions.
Workers in dusty areas on the site should be issued with PPE such as dust masks, aprons, gloves, safety boots, helmets, safety goggles among others, which should be worn all the time at the site.
Using efficient machines with low emission technologies for the ones that burn fossil fuels. Also use of clean fuels e.g. unleaded and de-sulphurized fuels.
Regular maintenance and services of machines and engines.
Sensitize truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicles at loading, offloading sites and parking areas and encourage them to keep vehicle engines off at these points.
Controlling the speed and operation of construction vehicles, especially over unpaved roads.
Avoiding open burning of solid waste through segregation and recycling, and through disposal according to a solid waste management  plan.


Generation of waste


Following EMCA regulations on Waste Management, 2006 Legal Notice 121
Employing a waste management plan such as terms collection schedules; ensuring all wastes are dumped in their designated areas and through legally acceptable methods and that the bins are regularly cleaned and disinfected.
Making available suitable facilities for the collection, segregation, and safe disposal of the wastes. Waste should be segregated in terms of recyclable, reusable, biodegradable, non-biodegradable and providing equipment for handling the wastes.
Ensuring all wastes are dumped in their designated areas and through legally acceptable methods approved by NEMA and County Government of Machakos; that is and accredited disposal sites.
Assessing and creating opportunities for Reducing, Reusing, Recycling and Recovering of demolition waste.


Occupational health and safety risks (OHS)


Employing an OSH plan that will outline all OSH risks and provide a strategy for their management.
Ensure all potential hazards are properly labelled and secured.
Raising awareness, educating workers on risks from equipment/machines used for demolition processes, and ensure they receive adequate training on the use of the equipment’s.
Providing all works onsite with adequate PPEs and monitoring regularly to ensure are replaced on time once they worn out.
Ensure there is security in and around the site to control the movement of people.
Creating safe and adequate emergency assembly point and making sure they are well labelled.
The site must have in place appropriate and adequate firefighting equipment of recommended standards and in key strategic points accessible by all workers onsite.
Provision of a clear gangways and passageways which can serve as escaping route in case of emergency.
Maintain on site telephone contacts for Machakos County fire brigade and any emergency provider such as St. John Ambulance, Kenya Red Cross, among others.
Construction materials should meet minimum standards applicable in the country by Kenya Bureau of Standards (KeBS).


Traffic impacts


A well-structured Traffic Management Plan will need to be implemented e.g. Efficient scheduling of deliveries to reduce traffic load.
Placing signs around the site notifying other vehicles about the heavy traffic and to set the speed limit around the site.
Flagmen should be employed to control traffic and assist construction vehicles as they enter and exit the project site. Ensuring all drivers for the project comply to speed regulations.


Chemical or oil spill


To  prevent  oil  spills  and  environmental contamination:  identify  high  risk  spill areas  (e.g.  generators,  fuel  tanks,  and lubricant  and  oils  storage  rooms),  and have  impervious  surfaces  (concrete floors) and capture facilities in place.
Products  such  as  lubricants  and  oils should  also  be  well  labelled  and  stored  appropriately.
Prepare  and  display  on  site  spill response  procedures  and  train  all  the workers on response management.
Maintain spill response kits at  the  site office.
Use of water-based fluids including nontoxic chemicals.
Ensure that no sanitary or waste water is discharged onto the land.



The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Machakos County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/8827200         National Environment Management Authority.

