
				Page: 3748GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 10131
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED RELOCATION OF PETROS FILLING STATION
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Petros Petroleum Enterprises) intends to relocation and construction of a petrol station.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impacts


Mitigation Measures 


Changes in Hydrology/ Impended Drainage


Proper Installation of drainage structures.
Install cascades to break the impact of water flowing in the drains.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures through proper design and maintenance.
Provide gratings to the drainage channels.
Regular checks on any sludge along drainage channels.
Visual checks of oil interceptors and drainage channels for any leaks.


Soil Erosion


Control earthworks.
Rehabilitate degraded environment to avoid siltation and wash offs.
Compact loose soils.
Landscaping.
Ensure management of excavation activities.
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures where necessary.
Proper disposal of excavated loose soil.


Air Pollution through Dust and Gaseous Emissions


Control speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase of excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Engage sensitive construction workers.
Proper use of PPE.


Noise Pollution


Sensitize drivers of construction machinery on effects of noise.
Maintain plant equipment (if present/used).
Construction activities to be restricted to daytime.
Workers in the vicinity of or involved in high-level noise to wear respective safety & protective gear i.e. earplugs & earmuffs.
Appropriate selection of machinery.


Oil Pollution


Proper storage, handling and disposal of new oil and used oil and related wastes.
Maintain plant and equipment to avoid leaks.
Maintenance of construction vehicles should be carried out in the contractor’s yard (off the site).
Provide oil interceptors along the drains leading from oil storage areas and dispensing pump islands.


Water Resource


Management of water usage. Avoid unnecessary wastage.
Recycling of water at the construction phase where possible.
Use of water conservation signs at the wash rooms and install water conserving taps.


Contractors Lay Down Area


Special attention should be paid to the sanitary facilities on site especially disposal of human waste.
Garbage should be disposed off in accordance with Municipal Council requirements.


Road Safety


Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles especially along road links leading to the site.
Provide bill boards at the site/entrance to notify motorists about the development.


Public Health and Occupational Safety


Ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure effective wastewater management.
Design of sewerage system should be as provided in the plans.
Provide First Aid kits on the site.
Sensitize residents/workers on environmental management.
Ensure there is no ponding to eliminate breading of mosquitoes during construction.
Workers should be trained on occupational health & safety and first Aid administration.
Train staff on petroleum product handling.
Sensitise workers on HIV and AIDS.


Vegetation


Landscaping and planting all disturbed areas.
Planting flowers / grassing should be done just before the rains or irrigated on dry spells.


Fire Safety Training/ Emergency Response Procedures (ERPS)


Training in fire fighting and regular drills.
To enhance health and safety preparedness among stakeholders.
Ensure equipment is in good working condition.
Put up emergency response contacts.
Put up ERP notification instructions.
Put up simple instructions on how to handle fires, product spills, LPG incidents, armed robbery and product contaminations.


Record Keeping


Collection and analysis of relevant environmental data at the site.
Data of maintenance of firefighting equipment.
Monthly product reconciliation (stock loss control).
Staff Training records.
Incidents and accidents registers.
Weekly inspection records of oil water interceptor and drainage systems.


Internal Audits


Monitoring will involve measurements, observations, evaluations, assessment of changes in water quality, waste management, Noise levels, contractor safety etc.

 

Fire Outbreak


Install fire-fighting equipment as provided by municipal council fire department.
Sensitize the residents on fire risks i.e. conduct regular fire drills.
Adapt effective emergency response plan.
Provide emergency numbers at strategic points.


Security


Provide security guards and facilities during construction period.
Security men should always be available to alleviate cases of robbery.
                                 


Water Quality and Waste Management


Construct oil interceptors and monitor daily.
Strict adherence to the provisions of Waste Management and Water Quality Regulations.
Construct adequate and standard wastewater treatment plant/system.
Reduce waste at source, recycling and disposal of unrecyclable waste in approved dumpsites. The proponent should explore engaging the services of a registered waste handler.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Makueni County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR/9836436         National Environment Management Authority.

