
				Page: 3750GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 10608
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL SERVICE STATION FOR GULF ENERGY LIMITED IN THIKA, PLOT L.R. NO. 12861/223 (14360), KIAMBU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Gulf Energy Limited) is proposing to construct a fully equipped service station with auxiliary facilities on Plot L.R. No. 12861/223 (14360) Thika, Kiambu County.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impacts


Mitigation Measures 


Vegetation disturbance


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project construction area.
Specify locations for vehicles and equipments, and areas of the site which shall be kept free of traffic, equipment and storage.
Designate access routes and parking area within the site.
Introduction of vegetation (trees, shrubs and grass) on open spaces and around the project site and their maintenance.
Design and implement appropriate landscaping program to help on re-vegetation.


Erosion control


Earthworks should be controlled so that land that is not required for the construction works is not disturbed. Wherever possible, earthworks should be carried out during the dry season to prevent soil from being washed away by the rain.
Excavated materials and excess earth will be kept at appropriate sites approved by the supervising engineer and the earth dumping sites designed in such a manner as to facilitate natural water discharge.
The Contractor shall protect areas susceptible to erosion by installing necessary temporary and permanent drainage works as soon as possible.


Waste water and waste oil management practices


Carefully collect used oil in drums and dispose of by licensed refuse contractor.
Adhere to wastewater management regulation of the legal Notice 121 and Water quality regulations of the Legal Notice 120.
Conduct wastewater monitoring to check compliance.
Document and train staff in the emergency spill response plan.


Sewer


Sewer line from the station will be connected to council sewer line across the road .


Poor housekeeping at dispensing


Pave the Pump Island and remote filling area with reinforced concrete.
Regular training of staff on pump island operations.


Leakage of tanks and
product lines


The tank and lines will be used as per their design life of 30 years and a UST / line replacement program put in to ensure tanks and lines are replaced prior to failure.
Monitor daily reconciliation of wet stock and inventory records.
In case of suspect losses, institute tank and line integrity testing; and
Conduct a soil gas survey to check the extent of contamination from the leaks.


Increased solid waste
generation


Comply with the requirements of the Environmental Management (Waste Management) Regulations Legal Notice 120.
Use of an integrated solid waste management plan through a hierarchy of 3R.
Use durable materials that shall not need to be replaced as often.
Waste should not be burned on site or dumped in undesignated waste disposal areas.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials.
Designate and construct an appropriate waste collection facility or refuse skips.
Use building materials that have minimal or no packaging to avoid the generation of excessive packaging waste.
Reuse packaging materials e.g. cartons, cement bags, empty metal etc.
Segregate waste at source.
Contract licensed waste contractors to collect waste.
Waste collection bins to be provided at designated points on site.


Dust emission


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Sprinkle water during excavation works by heavy machines.
Sprinkle water on graded access roads when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Provide masks to be provided to employees and worn.


Fire and accident


Provision and placement of appropriate fire extinguishers and training of personnel.
Provision of fully equipped First Aid box on site at all times.
Display warning signs at suitable locations.
Prohibit unauthorized persons at the station.
Weatherproof all lighting and power points located outside the fuel station.


Air pollution


Ensure that the generator is maintained to manufactures specifications.
Ensure that tank vents are located away from sensitive receptors.


Construction material sourcing


Construction materials shall be from approved sources.
Procure environmentally friendly and sustainable materials.
Do not use the following materials for construction of the building: Asbestos in any form; Lead, Lead paint or other materials containing Lead; Vermiculite, unless it is established as being fiber-free; Any product containing Cadmium.


Power consumption


Develop an energy management plan.


Noise and vibration


Noise level is within acceptable limits and construction activities shall, where possible, be confined to normal working hours.
All construction machinery are maintained and serviced in accordance with the contractor’s specifications.
Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operations to switch of engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.
Sensitize construction drivers to avoid revving vehicle engines or hooting.
Sound barriers to be erected around the construction areas.


Water and soil contamination


No grey water runoff from the site/working areas shall be permitted.
Potential pollutants of any kind and in any form shall be kept, stored and used in such a manner that any escape can be contained and the water table not endangered.
Take reasonable measures to control storm water and the erosive effects.
No construction materials shall be stockpiled within areas that are at risk of flooding.
Plastic sheeting, sandbags or geo-fabric approved by the


Public health and occupational health and safety


Develop a site safety action plan.
Daily site inspections should be done to ensure safe work practices are adhered to.
All workmen should be provided with personal protective equipment.
Appoint a foreman with knowledge on health, safety and environment regulations.
Record all site incidents and accidents and take corrective and preventive action.
Report and record all near misses.


Traffic management


Implement a traffic management program on daily basis.
Comply with applicable legislation and by-laws on regard to road safety and transport.
Movement of construction vehicles timed to avoid peak periods.
Ensure adequate entry and exit lane design and appropriate signage.


Archaeological findings


The Contractor should secure the location ‘as is’ and immediately call the National Museums of Kenya’s Archaeology Section.


Water utilization


The Contractor should monitor water consumption and utilization.
Sensitize construction workers on the importance of proper water management.


Energy utilization:


Develop an energy management plan;
Construction machinery and vehicles should be maintained and used in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications, to maximize efficiency and lower use of energy.
Construction workers should be sensitized on the importance of energy management.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR/2836305         National Environment Management Authority.

