
				Page: 3749GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 10607
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED WASTE OIL HANDLING YARD ON PLOT L.R. NO. 118/3/MOMBASA SOUTH ALONG UKUNDA HIGHWAY LIKONI AREA, MOMBASA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Pwani Trading Ark) is proposing to:
Set up overhead storage tanks.
Construct additional interceptor channels to the already existing ones.
Construct bund walls for storage tank.
Construct a drainage channel for storm water.
Set up an operational site office.
Transport waste oil from the Port of Mombasa to the waste oil handling yard.
Separate water from waste oil.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impact


Mitigation Measures


Traffic congestion and obstruction


Vehicles delivering materials to be given different delivery times.
Trucks to be parked inside the yard.


Potential increase in road incidences
 


Signage at the proposed site’s entrance to notify other motorists in the area about the project.
Marking of the road to be done along the access road.
Drivers of the trucks to be trained to observe road safety rules and comply with traffic regulations such as speed limits at the site especially while driving in and out of the yard.


Noise disturbance to the neighbors from machineries
 


Construction work to be restricted to day time to minimize noise disturbance.
The contractor to be advised to use well serviced machines to avoid generation of unnecessary noise.


Dust disturbance
 


Building materials especially ballast that are likely to produce dust to be sprinkled with water before use.


Increased demand for water
 


Water for construction to be brought in to the proposed site.
Avoid wastage.
Recycle water when possible.


Littering by solid waste
 


Transportation of such waste to follow the laid down regulations to prevent scattering of waste while in transit to disposal sites.
Workers handling the waste to be provided with appropriate protective clothing.


Occupational health and safety risks
 


Employees to be provided with appropriate personal protective clothing such as helmets, safety boots, gloves, nose muffs and overalls.
First aid services and sanitary facilities to be readily available on site.


Oil spillages


Appropriate siphoning equipment is to be used at the port to avoid oil spills.
 Transportation tankers and reception/storage tanks to be checked for any leakages at the start of operations and at regular intervals and the necessary precautions taken.
The operations area including the floor beneath storage tanks to be built of reinforced concrete slab.
Use of pipes to flow waste oil from storage tanks to decanting chambers and back.


Potential fire hazard


Provision of fire fighting appliances and clearly marking the fire points at the yard.
Workers to be trained on how to operate the fire fighting appliances.


Pollution by waste water
 


Waste water to be stored in one of the chambers in the yard and to be discharged to a designated facility from time to time by a contracted waste handler registered by NEMA.


Occupational health and safety risks
 


Employees to be provided with appropriate personal protective clothing such as helmets, safety boots, gloves, nose muffs and overalls.
Regular medical check-ups
First aid services and sanitary facilities, including water for drinking and bathing, to be readily available on site.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Mombasa County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
B. M. LANGWEN,
for Director-General,
MR/2836807         National Environment Management Authority.

