
				Page: 2550GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6707
THE NATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION CAMPAIGN STEERING COMMITTEE
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that His Excellency, Uhuru Kenyatta, President and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Forces of the Republic of Kenya, has established a Committee to be known as the National Anti-Corruption Campaign Steering Committee ( hereinafter referred as the “the Committee” comprising the following:
Eliud Wabukala (Archbishop)—(Chairperson).
Jessie Mutura (Ms.)—(Vice-Chairperson).
Rahab Mwikali Muiu (Mrs.).
Jardine Mgharo Mwangeka (Mrs.).
Jacline Akinyi Maganda (Ms.).
Francis Ng’ang’a.
Adan Wachu.
The solicitor-General, Office of the Attorney-General and Department of Justice.
The Principal Secretary, National Treasury.
The Principal Secretary, Ministry of Devolution and Planning.
The Principal Secretary, Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology.
The Managing Director, Kenya Broadcasting Corporation.
The Chairman, Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission.
The Director, National Anti-Corruption Campaign Steering Committee.
2.  The Members of the Committee, except the Director appointed under paragraph 6, shall hold office for a period of five (5) years.
3.  The functions of the Committee shall be to undertake a nationwide public education, sensitization and awareness creation campaign aimed at effecting fundamental changes in the attitudes, behaviour practices and culture of Kenyans towards corruption.
4.  In the performance of its functions under paragraph 3, the Committee shall—
(a) develop policies for strengthening the campaign against corruption;
(b) establish a strategic framework for the nationwide campaign against corruption;
(c)  develop indices for regular monitoring and evaluation of the anti-corruption campaign and publicly report on the progress made in the campaign;
(d) identify and engage partners in developing a mechanism for their effective participation in the campaign against corruption;
(e)  develop a mechanism for engaging strategic stakeholders and the general public to evolve a strong anti-corruption culture and participate in the fight against corruption;
(f)   identify and facilitate mobilization of resources required to achieve the goals and objectives of the campaign; and
(g) carry out such other functions as may be necessary or incidental to the success of the campaign;
5.  In the performance of its functions the Committee—
(a) shall be responsible to His Excellency the President;
(b) shall work closely with the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission;
(c) shall prepare half yearly reports for His Excellency the President;
(d) shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as the Committee shall consider necessary for the prudent discharge of its functions;
(e) may use official reports of any previous investigations relevant to its mandate;
(f)  may cause to be carried out such studies or research as may inform the Committee on its mandate;
(g) shall have all the powers necessary or expedient for the proper execution of its functions, including the power to regulate its own procedures; and
(h) may create offices and networks in the Counties to expedite the discharge of its functions.
6.  The Secretariat of the Committee:
(1) There shall be a Director appointed by the Attorney-General, who shall be the Head of the Secretariat and the Chief Executive Officer of the Committee and such other staff as shall be necessary. 
(2) The Secretariat shall be provided by the Office of the Attorney General and Department of Justice.
(3) The Secretariat shall be responsible to the Committee for: -
(i)    providing appropriate background briefing to the Committee;
 (ii)  policy interpretation, developing and implementing campaign programmes and activities;
(iii)  Preparing the Committee’s reports and disseminating any information deemed relevant to the Committee; and
(iv)  undertaking research and liaising with other anti-corruption bodies to gather the relevant information necessary for informing the Committee.
7.  GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 9854 of 2011 is revoked.
Dated the 19th September, 2014.
UHURU KENYATTA,
President.

