
				Page: 1578GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 4349
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED BONDO CLUSTER IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (PHASE I) IN SIAYA COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (National Irrigation Board) has proposed to develop the Bondo Cluster Irrigation Project. The Phase I of the project is aimed at developing four irrigation schemes within Rarieda District and Bondo District with a combined irrigable area of 3,000 ha.
East Asembo scheme targets to develop a net irrigable area of 395 Ha, and will draw water from Lake Victoria at an intake located at 659519E, 9980822N. Great Nam scheme targets to develop a net irrigable area of 477 Ha, and will draw water from Lake Victoria at an intake located at 649370.6E, 9978176.217N. Wagusu scheme targets to develop a net irrigable area of 420 Ha, and will draw water from Lake Victoria at an intake located at 632908.997E, 9979429.988N; and Yala scheme targets to develop a net irrigable area of 2193 Ha, and will draw water from Yala River at an intake located at 646765E, 9996273N.
The proposed irrigation project is based on gravity and pumped systems. Gravity system will draw water from Yala river where there is substantial elevation to ensure water is conveyed to the irrigation areas using gravity head. The main components of the gravity system will comprise; Headwork/Intake chamber; Sedimentation basin; Conveyance Pipeline; Main Pipelines, Distribution Pipelines, General pipeline fittings and appurtenance.
Below is a summary of the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measures


Construction phase


Interference with the physical setting
 


The design shall in no way propose to implement developments that will hinder drainage, change the topography or introduce physical changes that are not in harmony with the physical setting of the Project area.
The structures to be developed should be aesthetically acceptable to blend in with the surrounding. These structures should not form or end up being used by the resident population as access or bridges. No residential facilities shall be erected on site and the proponent shall as much as possible complete the works in such a way that natural aesthetics shall be retained at the locations. Restoration shall be undertaken to ensure that the original setting is as much as possible retained.


Interruption of existing infrastructure


Formal request for permission to cross, break in and build the water pipeline should be sought from affected property owners.
Formal engagement of key land and other property owners neighbouring the pipeline.
Passing of relevant information to each of the affected parties.
A work plan with clear responsibilities for each party should be developed to ensure smooth execution of the construction; and
On completion of works, each property owner should be contacted again to give views and if complains arise the contractor asked to address the same.



Flooding during
construction


Ensure pipeline routing are properly excavated.
Regularize checks and inspection of the pipeline routing to avert blockages;
The Resident Engineer should inspect all pipeline connections and joints.


Soil erosion


The contractor must implement erosion control measures to avoid erosion in areas that are prone to erosion, e.g. steep slopes and drainage lines.
Construct soil conservation measures at stockpiled sites.
Topsoil must be reinstated and rehabilitated and rehabilitated on top of sub soil.
All excavation works must be properly backfilled and compacted.


Soil compaction


Vehicles must be kept on existing roads or tracks where possible.
Minimize compaction during stockpiling by working the soil in the dry state.
Avoid unnecessary vehicle movement;
Rip compacted areas to reduce runoff and re-vegetate where required.
All topsoil and other soil profiles must be managed strictly.


Vegetation loss


The contractor should ensure that vegetation is cleared only where necessary.
Where mature trees are cut, new trees should be planted in adjacent areas.


Extraction of natural resources


A current and valid authorization from the Department of Mines prior to any blasting activity shall be obtained.
A qualified and registered blaster by the Department of Mines and Geology shall supervise all blasting and rock-splitting operations at all times.
The Contractor shall ensure that emergency services are notified, in writing, a minimum of 24 hours prior to any blasting activities commencing on site.
The Contractor shall take necessary precautions to prevent damage to special features and the general environment, which includes the removal of fly-rock. Environmental damage caused by blasting/drilling shall be repaired at the Contractor‘s expense.
The Contractor shall ensure that adequate warning is provided to the local communities immediately prior to all blasting. All signals shall also be clearly given.
The Contractor shall use blast mats for cover material during blasting. Topsoil shall not be used as blast cover.


Solid wastes


Provide litter collection facilities such as bins.
Dispose waste at a location that shall be approved by Resident Engineer in accordance with the waste management plan after consultation with the relevant stakeholders, including the local community.
The disposal site need to be more than 100 meters from watercourses and in a position that will facilitate the prevention of storm-water runoff from the site from entering the watercours.


Wastewater


All grey water runoff or uncontrolled discharges from the site/working areas (including wash down areas) to water courses should be contained and properly channelled.
Water containing such pollutants as cements, concrete, lime, chemicals and fuels shall be discharged into a conservancy tank for removal from site;
Potential pollutants of any kind and in any form shall be kept, stored and used in such a manner that any escape can be contained and the water table not endangered.
Wash areas shall be placed and constructed in such a manner so as to ensure that the surrounding areas (including groundwater) are not polluted.


Oil spills


Vehicle maintenance should be done on purpose- built impervious concrete platforms with oil and grease traps.
Standard operating practices for refueling mobile equipment such as a minimum 15m from any water channel should be practiced.
Operator training is an important aspect of preventive approach and should be put into used before assignment or in the course of duty.
All above surface tanks should be bounded and mounted on paved surfaces.
Ensure that all equipment are in good condition, clean and free from leaks
Oil spill containment and clean up equipment should be kept at the contractor's camps.


Air quality and dust


Workers shall be trained on management of air pollution from vehicles and machinery.
Vehicles delivering soil materials should be covered to reduce dust emissions.
Activities generating dust (excavation, handling and transport of soils) to be carried out in calm weather. The Resident Engineer shall suspend earthworks operations wherever visible dust is affecting properties adjoining the work site.
The contractor should provide dust masks to all personnel on dust-prone work sites.
Records of related complaints should be kept by the contractor and communicated to the Resident Engineer;
All construction machinery should be maintained and serviced in accordance with the equipment specifications and manufacturer‘s standards.


Noise and vibrations


Noise levels shall be kept within acceptable limits and construction activities shall, where possible be confined to normal working hours.
Equipment should be maintained regularly to reduce noise resulting from friction.
Workers in the vicinity of high-level noise to wear Personal Protective Equipment;
Limit pickup trucks and other small equipment to an idling time, observe a common sense approach to vehicle use and encourage workers to shut off vehicle engines whenever possible.
No unnecessary hooting by project and resident vehicles.


Operational phase


Pollution by pesticides and insecticides


Adopt an integrated pest management system, eco- farming and Adopt biological control and improved agricultural practices.


Hydrology


Adhere to the safest maximum permitted abstracted water quantities at the intakes.
Alternating release volumes of water from the intakes during low river flow seasons to optimize usage without interference with aquatic life and downstream users.
The Proponent shall monitor the hydrology to determine whether there is reduced downstream flow and to determine the right levels of abstraction.


Water logging


Assess project soils and their management needs, building dykes, apply water efficiently, consider drip or dawn/evening sprinkler irrigation, use lined canals or pipes to prevent seepage. Mulch exposed soil surfaces, Flush irrigated land regularly, Cultivate crops having high tolerance to salinity.


Land use conflicts


Control land use conflicts through Land use planning that should be participatory to designate areas for ecological, grazing and farming.


Water use conflicts


Encourage community participation in the project operation and develop an established community conflict resolution system.


Emergence of water related diseases


Clearing sediment and weeds regularly, Provide/ensure alternate facilities for domestic water supply, bathing and human waste disposal, Provide education and training for farmers and other community members on: Irrigation health risks, efficient use of irrigation water, Proper storage, handling, use and disposal of agro-chemicals, Monitor disease/infection occurrence and public health indicators, and take corrective measures.


Decommissioning phase


Demolition waste


All structures that will not be used for other purposes must be removed and recycled/reused as far as possible.


Vegetation disturbance
 


Implement an appropriate re- vegetation program to restore the site to its original status.
Consider use of indigenous plant species in re-vegetation.


Noise and vibration


Ensure that all equipment used are insulated or placed in enclosures
The noisy demolition works will be planned to be during the day.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Siaya County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5048151              National Environment Management Authority.

