
				Page: 675GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 1987
THE KENYA INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS ACT
(Cap. 411A)
TASKFORCE ON FORMULATION OF THE CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE BILL
APPOINTMENT
IT IS notified for the general information of the public that the Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Information Communication and Technology has appointed a task-force for the formulation of the Critical Infrastructure Bill under the Kenya Information and Communications Act.
The taskforce shall comprise of the following members—
Alice Kariuki—(Chairperson);
Members:
Fiona Asonga,
Stephen Waithaka Chege,
Tom Oyugi Omariba,
Francis Waithaka Ngokonyo (Eng.),
Patrick Mwinzi (Eng.),
Silas Murira Kinoti (Eng.),
Tom Onyambu Ogutu,
Henry O. Njenga,
Stanley Kerandi Manduku.
Joint Secretaries:
Ronoh Kipronoh P,
Stephen Kiptinness,
Christopher Maina.
The terms of reference of the taskforce are—
(a) to develop a draft policy and legislative framework required for the proposed Critical Infrastructure Bill;
(i)       identify (if any) the pieces of legislation that variously define critical infrastructure and/or provides for the regulation of critical infrastructure;
(ii)     review and propose harmonization to the said pieces of legislation;
(iii)    advise on proposed legislation that would centralize the standards and regulation of critical infrastructure;
(b) to hold consultative meetings with stakeholders and members of public to gather and record their views and proposals on the draft bill;
(c)  to identify the critical infrastructure sectors;
(d) to identify the critical infrastructure assets;
(e)  to identify the lead  agencies/departments associated with the respective sectoral critical infrastructure;
(f)   conduct:
(i)       a risk analysis  (natural/man-made threats):
(ii)     critical infrastructure vulnerabilities, and the potential impact of such threats to the critical infrastructure;
(iii)    propose methods and resources that can be used to protect and improve the protection  of critical infrastructure;
(iv)    advise on any counter-measures that can be employed and a prioritization thereof;
(g) identify a central agency/department that can be used as a focal point to co-ordinate the other agencies in the protection of critical infrastructure;
(h) advise on the creation of a critical infrastructure warning system which can be used to warn respective agencies and also be used to exchange ideas, improvements, best practice, etc.;
(i)   to conduct any other background research and provide advisory information to the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology on any other incidental information that is relevant to the drafting of this bill.
The taskforce shall have the powers necessary to undertake any matter incidental or ancillary to the matters stated herein.
The taskforce may co-opt such other persons, who possess the appropriate competencies as are necessary for the performance of the terms of reference.
5.  The taskforce shall—
(a) prepare a detailed work plan;
(b) hold consultative meetings with the Cabinet Secretary, sector stakeholders and members of public.
6.  The taskforce shall regulate its own procedure.
7.  The Secretariat of the taskforce shall be based at the offices of the Information Communications and Technologies Authority.
8.  The taskforce shall submit the final report to the Cabinet Secretary within two months from 12th March, 2015.
9.  The term of the office of the taskforce shall be for a period of two (2) months with effect from 12th March, 2015, and the Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communications and Technology may when necessary, extend the period.
Dated the 13th March, 2015.
FRED MATIANG’I,
Cabinet Secretary for,
Information Communication and Technology.

