
				Page: 2814GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8866
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED THIKA – KIGORO – KABETE GRAVITY WATER SUPPLY PIPELINES, TRANSVERSING THROUGH TANA RIVER BASIN IN GATANGA SUB-COUNTY OF MURANG’A COUNTY AND ATHI RIVER BASIN OF KIAMBU AND NAIROBI COUNTIES.
PURSUANT to Regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Athi Water Services Board, is proposing Thika – Kigoro – Kabete Gravity Water Supply Pipelines, Transversing through Tana River Basin in Gatanga Sub-County of Murang’a County and Athi River Basin of Kiambu and Nairobi counties. The project will involve complete pipeline covers, a total length of 64.8 km in length broken down as follows:  Raw water pipeline: covers 5.5 km long, running from Thika Dam through to Kigoro Water Treatment Plant, Treated water pipeline: covers 59.3 km long, running from Kigoro Water Treatment Plant to the existing Kabete reservoirs located in Westlands, Nairobi.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
 

Possible Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Impacts during Construction Phase


Loss of land and assets, resettlement and economic displacement.


Implement the RAP before the commencement of construction works;
Issues raised by PAPs regarding the previous wayleave acquisition should be addressed before construction works commence.


Destruction of uncompensated assets by the contractor
 


Adjacent land owners must be informed of the commencement of construction activities;
A Community Liaison Officer (CLO) will be appointed to be an intermediary between the project team and the surrounding community;
The Contractor should stick to the existing construction wayleave;
Any damages outside delineated areas should be compensated promptly by the contractor in accordance with the principles of RAP and in agreement with the affected parties.


Interference with existing installations


Notify the people in good time of the likely interruptions and the period it is expected to last;
Liaison with government agencies in charge of public infrastructure such as roads, water and power supply whose assets are likely to be affected;
Capacity building and training should be conducted among the construction workers on the way they can protect themselves from exposed dangers during construction;
Restrict the construction activities to the mapped out area.


Soil erosion and sedimentation


Clear delineation of construction work areas to avoid unnecessary vegetation clearance and soil loosening;
Implement planned erosion control measures to avoid erosion in areas that are prone to erosion, e.g. steep slopes and drainage lines;
Topsoil stockpiles will be vegetated to prevent erosion;
All excavation works must be properly backfilled and compacted;
Ensure downstream water users are informed about any unprecedented release of heavily silted water into the river;
Planting of vegetation cover such grass along the pipeline wayleave to curb soil erosion after construction works.


Health of the workers and risk of accidents.


Registration of the workplace by the Directorate of Occupational Safety and Health Services (DOSHS);
Establishment of a Health and Safety Committee for the project team as per the Health and Safety Committee Rules 2004 of the OSHA Act;
The Contractor shall present a Health and Safety Policy for approval by the Engineer prior to commencement of work;
Qualified Health and Safety auditor should be contracted to conduct annual Health and Safety (H&S) Audits;
Provision of appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for project workers and enforcement of use;
Maintain an incident/accident register, in accordance with the OSHA 2007 and report incidences to the respective DOSHS;
Provide adequate sanitary facilities
Basic training for workers on Environment, Health and Safety;
Provide accessible First Aid Kits at all work areas and ensure availability of a trained First Aider at all times;
Provide adequate fire fighting equipment capable of fighting all classes of fire at construction sites;
Put “No smoking signs” in areas where inflammables are stored;
Provide clean drinking water to the construction workers at all times;
Rehabilitate excavated sites as soon as construction is completed;


Risk to public safety


Warning signs, warning tapes and notices should be put along active construction sites;
Excavation of trenches ahead of pipe laying and backfilling shall be limited such that the period from the time of opening a trench to temporary reinstatement to 48 hours unless exceptional circumstances agreed with the Engineer prevail;
Work crews at all road crossings should include flagmen to provide for the safe passage of traffic;
All works which may pose a hazard to humans and domestic animals are to be protected, demarcated or cordoned off as instructed by the Project Manager.


Generation of large amount of waste water and chemical during testing and commissioning
 


Notify members of the public likely to be affected early in advance;
Sensitize and educated the locals and workers on impact of chemicals being used during testing;
If possible testing should be timed to coincide with the dry months when the river are not flooded to reduce the project zone of impacts;
Contractor should get a permit from WRMA before releasing water with chemicals into the any river;
A well constructed drainage channel should be put up so as to reduce the velocity of water downstream hence minimizing erosion;
Contractor should provide workers with appropriate PPEs before handling of any chemicals.


Pollution, sedimentation of rivers and destruction of river banks
 


Reinstate the river course system.
Support revegetation of riparian reserves.
Ensure approvals of river crossings are secured before commencement of construction works.


Cutting of roads/ use of roads and road  reserves


Liaise with relevant roads authorities to minimize any service disruptions;
Reinstate the road according as stated in laws and regulations of Kenya i.e. KeNHA and Kenya Roads Act.
Restrict constructions works to the time of the day when there is limited traffic flow along the affected roads i.e 11am to 3pm.
Put up a notice to inform the affected road users on the likely inconvenience with specified dates and length of time for the construction works;
Contractor should stick to the area designated for construction works to prevent the likelihood construction vehicles obstructing the whole road.


Possible water supply interruptions to Nairobi residents


A notice should be issued to affected supply chain about the water supply interruptions with schedule period of time.
The affected pipes should be fixed at the shortest time possible to allow for quick restoration of normal water supply.


Vegetation clearance
 


Clear delineation of construction work areas to avoid unnecessary vegetation clearance;
Affected tree farmers should be compensated in line with RAP recommendation;
The trees planted should be pipeline friendly to protect the pipe from being destroyed by mature/penetrative roots;
Tree farmers should be notified in advance to harvest their trees.


Soil compaction


Vehicles must use existing/designated access roads/tracks where possible;
Split compacted areas to reduce runoff and re-vegetate where required;
All topsoil and other soil profiles must be managed strictly.


Noise generation and vibration


Noise levels shall be kept within acceptable limits preferably as stipulated within the EMCA (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) Control Regulations, 2009 and construction activities shall, where possible, be limited to normal working hours;
Monitoring of noise and vibration in sensitive locations (hospitals, teaching facilities, churches) near the project area to ensure they are at acceptable standards;
Equipment should be maintained regularly to reduce noise as a result of friction;
Workers exposed to high-level noise must wear personal protective equipments (PPEs);
Use of silencers where applicable, should be encouraged;
Residents in close proximity should be given at least 24 hours notification of any abnormal noise source.


Spoils generation


Maximise the re-use of excavated materials in the works as far as feasible to ensure that no permanent spoil dumps are created;
The spoil materials can be used elsewhere as recommended by the county government such as in road constructions and rehabilitation;
Properly dispose off the spoil in the location identified by the design team and approved by the confirmed land owners;
Care should be taken to avoid spoil location in land that could otherwise be used for productive purposes;
Formulation and implementation of erosion and siltation management measures at chosen spoil locations.


Interference with
river’s water quality.


Implement Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for working in water and application of best practice on sediment control and soil stockpiles.
Apply for a water discharge license and ensure that the conditions of the license are observed;
Ensure that the u-channels and manholes are free of silt and sediment;
All manholes on-site should be covered and sealed;
Sandbags/earth bund should be adopted to prevent washing away of sand/silt and wastewater to drains, catch pit, public road and footpath;
Storage areas for fuels, oils or other liquid chemicals should be far away from surface water drains and all vehicle be serviced off site.


Spread of invasive species


Materials and equipment used during construction should not contain propagules of species from another area;
All invasive species/weeds along the project area should be destroyed and none of the species should be replanted in the area;
Trees and grasses should be planted in the area immediately after construction to avoid invasion of unwanted species.


Solid waste generation


Formulation and implementation of suitable Waste Management Plan in line with Waste Management Regulations, 2006.
Final disposal of the site waste should be done at a location that approved by Resident Engineer
Any hazardous wastes generated must be handled appropriately and disposed off only by licensed hazardous wastes handlers;
Provide adequate sanitation facilities for workers such as toilets and bathrooms;
Develop a waste management plan to handle temporary storage, transport and disposal of hazardous waste;
Strategically place skips and bins within the camp sites and construction sites;
Provide oil drums and plants/equipments with drip trays;
Present proposal of the camp site layout for approval by the relevant authorities


Liquid waste generation


All grey water runoff or uncontrolled discharges from the site/working areas (including wash-down areas) to water courses should be contained and properly channelled;
Water containing pollutants such as cements, concrete, lime, chemicals and fuels shall be discharged into a conservancy tank for removal from site;
The contractor must act promptly on remedying any pollution incidents on site.


Risks of oil spills/leaks
 


Ensure clarity in labelling and storage of fluids in secure place with minimal ease of contamination in case of spills or leaks;
Implement Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for working in water;
Vehicle maintenance should be done on purpose-built impervious concrete platforms with oil and grease traps;
Ensure that all equipment are in good condition, clean and free from leaks;
Oil spill containment and clean up equipment should be kept at the contractor's camp;
Ensure compliance with Waste Management regulations.


Destruction of identified and unidentified cultural sites


Cutting of Mugumo tree along the project area should be avoided and if necessary, the consent of Kikuyu elders should be sought before felling the tree.
Development and implementation of a chance find procedure in case archaeological sites are identified.


Impacts during Operation Phase


Increase of domestic wastewater generation


Expansion of the sewerage system and the sewer treatment works for Nairobi to cater for the increase wastewater likely to be generated by increased water supply.
Construction of community ablution blocks connected to the sewer system through WASSIP project, at informal settlement.


Waste water released through the washouts and swabs during pipe cleaning


Discharge from the treatment plant should be treated to the recommended standards as stipulated in the Water Act.
Trees and grass and papyrus reeds should be planted around the swabbing and washout chambers and along the provided drainage channel to reduce velocity of water downstream during the pipe cleaning


Use of pipe as a crossway and exposure of pipeline by erosion pose a safety hazard to the local community.
 


Fence out the pipeline wayleave immediately after construction
Sensitize the locals on the expected dangers of using the pipeline as a form of a bridge;
If possible build a footbridge  for the local community to use as a river crossing instead of crossing using the pipe;
Revegetate the pipeline wayleave with grass to reduce the impact of erosion.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
 (a) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources and Regional Development Authorities, NHIF Building, 12th Floor, Ragati Road, Upper Hill, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(b) Director General, NEMA Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. BOX: 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Murang’a County.
A copy of the EIA report can be downloaded at www.nema.go.ke
NEMA invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision-making process for this project. Kindly quote ref. no. NEMA/EIA/5/2/1236
Comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke
 
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/8449276              National Environment Management Authority.

