
				Page: 1878GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  2971
REPUBLIC OF KENYA
MINISTRY OF LAND, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE FOR STATE OFFICERS
A COMMITMENT TO ABIDE BY THE REQUIREMENTS OF
THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY ACT
(CAP. 182)
ARRANGEMENT OF THE CODE
preamble
PART I—PRELIMINARY
1. Citation
2. Interpretation
3. Application of Code
4. Application of the Constitution and Public Officer Ethics Act, 2003
5. State Officers to sign Code
PART II—REQUIREMENTS
6. Rule of Law
7. Public trust
8. Responsibility and duties
9. Performance of duties
10. Professionalism
11. Financial Probity
12. Moral and ethical requirements
13. Gifts or benefits in Kind
14. Wrongful or unlawful acquisition of property
15. Conflict of interest
16. Participation in tenders
17. Public Collections
18. Bank accounts outside Kenya
19. Acting for foreigners
20. Care of property
21. Misuse of official information
22. Political neutrality
23. Impartiality
24. Giving of advice
25. Gainful employment
26. Offers of future employment
27. Former State Officer acting in a government or public entity matter
28. Misleading the public
29. Falsification of records
30. Conduct of private affairs
31. Bullying
32. Citizenship and Leadership
33. Reporting improper orders
34. Confidentiality
35. Duty to prevent occurrence of corruption or unethical practice in the Ministry
36. Promotion of ethics, integrity and best practices in the Ministry
37. Dress Code
38. Implementation of the Code
39. Advisory Opinion
40. Breach of Code
41. Review
THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY ACT
(Cap. 182)
The Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers in the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development
ESTABLISHMENT of the Code
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 37 of the Leadership and Integrity Act, Cap. 182 (‘the Act’) laws of Kenya, the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development establishes this Leadership and Integrity Code for the State Officers in the Ministry.
THE LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE FOR STATE OFFICERS IN THE MINISTRY OF LAND, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Preamble
The ethos of the Public Service is to offer services to members of the public and support successive governments of the Republic of Kenya with loyalty, impartiality, honesty and integrity and to facilitate the objectives of enhancing peace, socioeconomic growth and prosperity.
In accomplishing the mission of the government, State Officers will be guided by a shared vision that the Ministry of Land, Housing & Urban Development will be an efficiently and effectively performing institution, committed to serving citizens with courtesy, integrity, giving value for the tax payers money; not demanding of the citizens but anxious to be of service to them.
This Code is established pursuant to Section 37 of the Act, which requires that every public entity to prescribe a Specific Leadership and Integrity Code for the State Officers in the entity. The Code is intended to establish standards of integrity, behavior and ethical conduct in the leadership of the Ministry of Land, Housing & Urban Development by ensuring that the State Officers respect the values, principles and requirements of the Constitution in the discharge of their duties.
PART I—PRELIMINARY
1. Citation
This Code may be cited as the Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers in the Ministry of Land, Housing & Urban Development.
2. Interpretation
Where words under this part have similar definitions as under Part 2 of the Act definitions in the Code could be done by reference.
“Act” means the Leadership and Integrity Act, Cap 182, Laws of Kenya;
“Asset” means a thing, tangible or intangible, owned, whether wholly or in part, or controlled by a person, which has an actual or determinable economic value and can be sold, exchanged or otherwise used or applied to meet an obligation or acquire something else in return;
“Authorized officer” means an authorized officer of the Ministry having jurisdiction pursuant to Article 234(5) of the Constitution and the Public Service Regulations 2005;
 “Bank Account” means an account maintained by a bank or any other financial institution for and in the name of, or in the name designated by, a customer of the bank or other financial institution and into which money is paid or withdrawn by or for the benefit of that customer or held in trust for that customer and in which the transactions between the customer and the bank or other financial institution are recorded;
“Business associate” means a person who does business with or on behalf of a State Officer and has express or implied authority from that State Officer;
“Cabinet Secretary” means the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for matters relating to leadership and integrity in the Land, Housing & Urban Development;
“Code” means the Leadership and Integrity Code for State Officers of the Land, Housing & Urban Development
 “Commission” means the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission established under the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Act, Cap 65A.
“General Code” means the Code prescribed under Part II of the Act;
“Ministry” means the Ministry of Land, Housing & Urban Development established under the Presidential Oder No. 1 of 2013. 
“Personal interest” means a matter in which a State Officer has a direct or indirect pecuniary or non-pecuniary interest and includes the interest of his/her spouse, child, business associate or agent;
“Principal Secretary” means the Principal Secretary for the time being responsible for Resource Management in the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development.
“Register” means the register of State Officers’ Registrable Interest.
“Registrable Interest” means an interest that may, or may be perceived to prejudice the integrity of a State Officer in the discharge of official functions of his office.
“Regulations” mean the Regulations made by the Commission pursuant to section 54 of the Act;
“Spouse” means a wife or husband;
“State Officer” means Cabinet Secretary, Principal Secretary in the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development
3.  Application of Code
This Code applies to State Officers in the Ministry.
4.  Application of Chapter six of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010,  the Public Officer Ethics Act, Cap. 183 and other laws
(1)   The provisions of Chapter Six of the Constitution shall form part of this Code;
(2)   Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the provisions of the Public Officer Ethics Act and any other relevant Legislations (Public Service Commission Act (Revised), Public Finance Management Act, Cap. (412C), The Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act, No. 13/2015) shall form part of this Code in so far as they conform to the provisions of the Leadership and Integrity Act.
Commencement
This code shall take effect on the date of publication in the Kenya Gazette.
(i)      If any provision of the Act is in conflict with the Public Officer Ethics Act, the Act    shall prevail.
(i)      If any provision of the code is in conflict with the Act, the Act shall prevail.
5.  State Officer to sign Code
(1)   A State Officer appointed to the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development shall sign and commit to this Code at the time of taking oath of office or within seven days of assuming office.
(2)   The provisions of this Code take effect from the date it is published in the Kenya Gazette.
PART II—REQUIREMENTS
6.  Rule of Law
(1)   A State Officer shall respect and abide by the Constitution and the Law;
(2)   A State Officer shall carry out the duties of his/ her office in accordance with the Law;
(3)   In carrying out the duties of his/her office, a State Officer shall not violate the rights and fundamental freedoms of any person unless otherwise expressly provided for in the Law and in accordance with Article 24 of the Constitution.
7.  Public Trust
A State Office is a position of public trust and the authority and responsibility vested in a State Officer shall be exercised by the State Officer in the best interest of the Ministry and the people of Kenya.
8.  Responsibility and duties
Subject to the Constitution and any other Law, a State Officer shall take personal responsibility for the reasonably foreseeable consequences of any actions or omissions arising from the discharge of the duties of the office.
9.  Performance of duties
A State Officer shall, to the best of his/ her ability—
(1)   Carry out the duties of the office efficiently, effectively and honestly;
(2)   Carry out the duties of the office in a transparent and accountable manner;
(3)   Keep accurate records and documents relating to the functions of the office
(4)   Report truthfully on all matters of the Ministry; and
(5)   Communicate effectively and responsibly.
10. Professionalism
A State Officer shall —
(1)   Carry out the duties of his/her office in a manner that maintains public confidence in the integrity of the office;
(2)   Treat members of the public, staff and other State and Public Officers with courtesy and respect;
(3)   Not discriminate against any person, except as is expressly provided by the law;
(4)   To the extent appropriate to the office, maintain high standards of performance and level of professionalism within the Ministry; and
(5)   If the State Officer is a member of a professional body, observe and subscribe to the ethical and professional requirements of that body in so far as the requirements do not contravene the Constitution, any other law or this Code.
11. Financial Probity
(1)   A State Officer shall not use his or her office to unlawfully or wrongfully enrich himself or herself or any other person;
(2)   Subject to Article 76(2)(b) of the Constitution, a State Officer shall not seek or  accept a personal loan or benefit which may compromise the State Officer in carrying out his or her duties;
(3)   A State Officer shall not:
(a)   Evade paying taxes.
(b)   Neglect their financial obligations.
12.           Moral and ethical requirements
(1)   A State Officer shall observe and maintain the following ethical and moral requirements for the purposes of Articles 99 (1) (b) and 193 (1) of the Constitution —
(a)   Demonstrate honesty in the conduct of his or her public and private affairs;
(b)   Not to engage in activities that amount to abuse of office;
(c)   Accurately and honestly present information to the public;
(d)   Not engage in wrongful conduct in furtherance of personal benefit;
(e)   Not misuse public resources;
(f)    Not falsify any records;
(g)   Not sexually harass or have inappropriate sexual relations with other state officers, staff of the Ministry or any other person;
(h)   Not commit offences and in particular, any of the offences under Part XV & XVI of the Penal Code, (Cap 63), the Sexual Offence Act, ( Cap 62A), the Counter Trafficking  in Persons ( Cap 61) and the Children Act ( Cap 141);
(i)    Not engage in actions which would lead to the State officer’s removal from the membership of a professional body in accordance with the law; and
(j)    Not neglect family or parental obligations as provided for under any law
13. Gifts or benefits in Kind
(1)   A gift or donation given to a State Officer on a public or official occasion shall be treated as a gift or donation to the Ministry;
(2)   Notwithstanding subsection (1), a State Officer may receive a gift given to the
State Officer in an official capacity, provided that—
(a)   The gift is within the ordinary bounds of propriety, a usual expression of courtesy or protocol and within the ordinary standards of hospitality;
(b)   The gift is not monetary
(c)   The gift does not exceed Ksh.20, 000 or such other value as may be prescribed by the Commission in the Regulations
(3)   A State Officer shall not —
(a)   Accept or solicit for gifts, hospitality or other benefits from a person who;
(i)    Is under investigation; on any Commission/omission relating to the Ministry
(ii)   Has a contractual/legal relationship with the Ministry
(iii)  Has any interest that is directly or indirectly connected with the State officer’s duties;
(b)   Receive a gift which has the potential of compromising his or her integrity, objectivity or impartiality; or
(c)   Accept any type of gift expressly prohibited by the Commission in the Regulations, under the Act or any other Law.
(4)   Subject to section 13(2), a State Officer who receives a gift or donation shall upon return to the office declare the gift or donation to the Ministry within fourteen days of receipt of the gift as prescribed in Form A, Reports of Gifts Received at Appendix II
(5)   The Ministry shall maintain a register of all gifts received by State Officers as provided for in the regulations.
14. Wrongful or unlawful acquisition of property
A State Officer shall not use the office to wrongfully or unlawfully acquire or influence the acquisition of property.
15. Conflict of interest
(1)   A State Officer shall use the best efforts to avoid being in a situation where his or her personal interests conflict or appear to conflict with his/ her official duties.
(2)   Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), a State Officer shall not hold shares or have any other interest in a corporation, partnership or other body, directly or through another person, if holding those shares or having that interest would result in a conflict of the State officer’s personal interests and the officer’s official duties.
(3)   A State Officer whose personal interest conflict with their official duties shall declare the personal interest to the Ministry or Commission in the case of a Cabinet Secretary or Principal Secretary respectively as prescribed in Form B Declaration of Interest at Appendix III.
State Officers will collectively and individually take measures to ensure that they and those in the Ministry declare their Assets and Liabilities by filling the prescribed form on initial appointment, biannual and final declaration on exit as required by the Public Officers Ethics Act, (Cap. 183).
(4)   The Ministry or the Commission may give directions on the appropriate action to be taken by the State Officer to avoid the conflict of interest and the State Officer shall comply with the directions; and refrain from participating in any deliberations with respect to the matter. Any direction issued by the Commission under this sub-section shall be in writing.
(5)   Notwithstanding any directions to the contrary under subsection (4), a State officer shall not award or influence the award of a contract to;
(a)   Himself or herself;
(b)   The State Officer’s spouse or child;
(c)   A business associate or agent; or
(d)   A corporation, private company, partnership or other body in which the officer has a substantial or controlling interest.
(6)   Where a State Officer is present at a meeting, and an issue which is likely to result in a conflict of interest is to be discussed, the State Officer shall declare the interest at the beginning of the meeting or before the issue is deliberated upon.
(7)   A declaration of a conflict of interest under subsection (6) shall be recorded in the minutes of that meeting.
(8)   The Ministry shall maintain a register of conflicts of interest in the prescribed form in which an affected State Officer shall register the particulars of the registrable interests, stating the nature and extent of the conflict.
(9)   For purposes of subsection (8), the registrable interests shall include:-
(a)   The interests set out in the Second Schedule of the Act;
(b)   Any connection with a person or a company, whether by relation, friendship, holding of shares or otherwise, which is subject of an investigation by the Commission;
(c)   Any application for employment or other form of engagement with the Ministry, by a family member or friend of the State Officer or by a corporation associated with the State Officer;
(d)   Any application to the Ministry, by a family member or friend of the State Officer, for clearance with respect to appointment or election to any public office;
(e) Any other matter which, in the opinion of the State Officer, taking into account the circumstances thereof, is necessary for registration as a conflict of interest.
(10)    The Ministry shall keep the register of conflict of interest for five years after the last entry in each volume of the register;
(11)    The Ministry shall prepare a report of the registered interest within thirty days after the close of a financial year and forward such reports to the Commission;
(12)    A State Officer shall ensure that an entry of registrable interests under subsection (7) is updated and to notify the Commission of any changes in the registrable interests, within one month of each change occurring.
16. Participation in tenders issued by the Ministry
(1)   A State Officer shall not participate in a tender for the supply of goods or services to the Ministry.
(2)   Notwithstanding subsection (1), a company or entity associated with the State Officer shall not be construed as trading with the Ministry unless:
(a)   The State Officer has a controlling shareholding in the company or entity; or,
(b)   The State Officer is a Director of the Company.
17. Public Collections
(1)   A State Officer shall not solicit for contributions from the Ministry or any other person or entity for a public purpose unless the President has, by notice in the Gazette, declared a national disaster and allowed a public collection for the purpose of the national disaster in accordance with the law;
(2)   A State Officer shall not participate in a public collection of funds in a way that reflects adversely on that State officer’s integrity, impartiality or interferes with the performance of the official duties.
(3)   Subject to subsection (2), a State Officer may, with the approval of the Authorized Officer, participate in a collection involving a private cause.
(4)   A State Officer who has been given approval to take an active part in a collection involving a private course shall not use his/her office for that purpose nor involve any staff of the Ministry.
18. Bank accounts outside Kenya
(1)   Subject to Article 76(2) of the Constitution or any other written law, a State Officer shall not open or continue to operate a bank account outside Kenya without the approval of the Commission;
(2)   A State Officer who has reasonable grounds for opening or operating a bank account outside Kenya shall apply to the Commission for approval to open or operate a bank account;
(3)   A State Officer who operates or controls the operation of a bank account outside Kenya shall submit statements of the account annually to the Commission and authorize it to verify the statements and any other relevant information from the foreign financial institution in which the account is held;
(4)   Subject to subsections (1) and (2), a person who is appointed as a State Officer in the Ministry and has a bank account outside Kenya shall, upon such appointment, close the bank account within three months;
(5)   Notwithstanding subsection (4), a State Officer who wishes to open or continue to operate a bank account outside Kenya shall within thirty days of becoming a State officer submit an application to the commission for approval
19. Acting for foreigners
(1)   A State Officer shall not be an agent of, or further the interests of a foreign government, organization or individual in a manner that may be detrimental to the security interests of Kenya, except when acting in the course of official duty.
(2)   For the purposes of this section —
(a)   An individual is a foreigner if the individual is not a citizen of Kenya; and
(b)   An organization is foreign if it is established outside Kenya or is owned or controlled by a foreign government, organization or individual.
20. Care of property
(1)   A State Officer shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that public property in the officer’s custody, possession or control is taken care of and is in good repair and condition;
(2)   A State Officer shall not use public property, funds or services that are acquired in the course of or as a result of the official duties, for activities that are not related to the official work of the State Officer;
(3)   A State Officer shall surrender to the Ministry all the public property in their custody, possession or control at the end of the appointment term;
(4)   A State Officer who contravenes subsection (2) or (3) shall, in addition to any other penalties provided for under the Constitution, the Act or any other law, be personally liable for any loss or damage to the public property.
21. Misuse of official information
(1)   A State Officer shall not directly or indirectly use or allow any person under the officer’s authority to use any information obtained through or in connection with the office for any other purposes other than of —
(a)   Furthering the interests of the Act
(b)   Educational, research, literary, scientific or other purposes not prohibited by law.
22. Political neutrality
(1)   A State officer, shall not, in the performance of his /her duties—
(a)   Act as an agent for, or further the interests of a political party or candidate in an election; or
(b)   Manifest support for or opposition to any political party or candidate in an election.
(2)   Engage in any political activity that may compromise or be seen to compromise the political neutrality of the office subject to any laws relating to elections.
23. Impartiality
A State Officer shall, at all times, carry out the duties of the office with impartiality and objectivity in accordance with Articles 10, 27, 73(2)(b) and 232 of the Constitution and shall not practice favoritism, nepotism, tribalism, cronyism, religious bias or engage in corrupt or unethical practices.
24. Giving of advice
A State Officer who has a duty to give advice shall give honest, accurate and impartial advice without fear or favour.
25. Gainful employment
(1)   Subject to subsection (2), a full time State Officer shall not participate in any other gainful employment.
(2)   In this section, 

