
				Page: 1895GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  2986
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED INTEGRATED MASTER PLAN; TOWN HOUSES, SERVICED VILLAS, SHOPPING CENTRE, NURSERY SCHOOL AND RECREATIONAL AND CONFERENCE CENTRE ON L.R NO. 5954/2 AND L.R. NO. 5830/7 (AMALGAMATED) ALONG NGONG ROAD KAREN IN NAIROBI CITY COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Keith Howard Osmond and Valerie Mary Limb is proposing to develop 50 serviced villas, nursery school, clinic, 5 conference centers and a recreational centre which consists of 15 cottages, a club and playgrounds on Plots L.R No.5954/2 and 5830/7(Amalgamated). The project activities will entail clearing the site, excavation, building works, plumbing works, external works and finishes.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Potential Negative Impacts


Recommended Mitigation Measures


Medical waste (pharmaceutical waste)


Pharmaceutical waste will be placed in pharmaceutical waste containers labeled “incineration only” so that they can be visible from any lateral direction. The containers should also be color coded to differentiate the pharmaceutical waste from the hazardous pharmaceutical waste.


 


Pharmaceutical waste including syringes will be placed into a sharps container or chemo container at the point of generation, stored in a utility room and then transported to a central holding area.


 


Pharmaceutical waste will be managed and disposed of by the pharmacy according to procedures specific to the medication type.
A permitted contractor will transport and incinerate the hazardous pharmaceutical waste generated by the clinic.


Noise pollution


Sound-attenuated equipment will be used as much as possible.
Minimize idling time for pick-up trucks and other small machinery should be ensured.
Provide appropriate PPE for all workers operating in noisy areas or with noisy machines.
As this is predominantly a residential area, no construction should be allowed at night.


Construction safety


Construction of adequate hoarding around the project site prior to commencement of any works.
Clear placement of signage to warn surrounding users of threat of falling debris.
Provide and regularly maintain adequate firefighting equipment.
All site staff to be trained on fire safety procedures, emergency response and the proper use of firefighting equipment.
Establish fire assembly points.
Install a fire alarm.
Prepare comprehensive Accident Response Plan prior to commencement of construction.
All workers should be trained on proper accidence response procedure prior to commencement of construction.
Strictly enforce adherence to on-site safety procedures.
All workers to wear appropriate PPE while on site.


Solid waster


Construction waste will be disposed of at approved County Government of Nairobi dumpsites and by registered private contractors.
Waste to be sorted and disposed of in accordance to Legal Notice 120 of 2006, Waste Regulations.
Waste generated during the project operational phase will be collected by a private contractor for final disposal.
Provide covered receptacles for waste disposal and storage throughout the project site.
All persons involved in waste collection and disposal shall be in appropriate PPE.


Traffic management


Provide adequate on-site parking.
Construction vehicles shall be under strict instructions to minimize unnecessary trips.
Traffic speeds for construction and other vehicles coming to and from the project site shall be restricted to 15 mph.


Habitat destruction


Reuse of excavated soil for landscaping and planting trees and flowers to restore part of the biodiversity within the site.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi City County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
GEOFFREY WAHUNGU,
Director-General,
MR/9327239         National Environment Management Authority.

