
				Page: 2342GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6071
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF COPPER CABLES, LEAD ACID BATTERIES AND AUTOMOTIVE SPARE PARTS INCLUDING SMELTING AND RECYCLING OPERATIONS OF NON-FERROUS METAL SCRAP AND USED AUTOMOBILE BATTERIES TO BE LOCATED ON TITLE NUMBER NAIVASHA/MWICHIRINGIRI BLOCK 2/253, NAKURU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Ganesh Eco Solutions Limited) is proposing a development comprising a warehouse of approx. 10,000 square feet shall be built to carry out smelting and recycling activities of used automobile batteries and non-ferrous metal scrap. Office space, storage godowns, Toilets, Drainage, Electric Panel room, Security Guard room etc shall also be built in accordance to operations.
The plant shall be installed with the most modern manufacturing facilities. The highly sophisticated production process can mainly be divided into four phases:
To drain the USED LEAD ACID BATTERIES (ULAB’s) in a specified platform to collect the acid in a pit and transfer this acid to the ETP for processing.
To sort out different Non-ferrous metal scrap and segregate.
Cutting of the drained ULAB’s and separation of its contents into lead bearing parts and non-lead bearing parts.
Smelting of lead bearing parts through rotary furnace to recover lead in a raw form.
Smelting of various non-ferrous metal scrap in their respective furnaces to recover their respective metals in pure form.
Melting of raw lead in kettle pots for producing pure refined lead.
The refined lead then will be grinded in ball mill to produce the lead oxide powder of international grade
Manufacture of Copper Wire Rods from refined copper obtained from smelting operations.
Manufacture of Automotive Spare parts from respective Non-Ferrous metals.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Expected Negative Impacts


Recommended Mitigation Measures


1. Minimize extraction site impacts and ensure efficient use of raw materials in construction


High Demand of Raw material


1. Source building materials from local suppliers who use environmentally friendly processes in their operations.


2. Ensure accurate budgeting and estimation of actual construction material requirements to ensure that the least amount of material necessary is ordered.


3. Ensure that damage or loss of materials at the construction site is kept minimal through proper storage.


4. Use at least 5%-10% recycled, refurbished or salvaged materials to reduce the use of raw materials and divert material from landfills


2. Reduce storm-water, runoff and soil erosion


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


1. Surface runoff and roof water shall be harvested and stored in underground reservoir for reuse.


2. A storm water management plan that minimizes impervious area infiltration by use of recharge areas and use of detention and/or retention with graduated outlet control structure will be designed.


3. Minimize solid waste generation and ensure efficient solid waste management during construction


Increased solid waste generation
 
 


1. Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: 1. Source reduction 2. Recycling 3.Composting and reuse 4. Combustion 5. Sanitary land filling.


2. Through accurate estimation of the sizes and quantities of materials required, order materials in the sizes and quantities they will be needed, rather than cutting them to size, or having large quantities of residual materials.


3. Ensure that construction materials left over at the end of construction will be used in other projects rather than being disposed of.


4. Ensure that damaged or wasted construction materials including cabinets, doors, plumbing and lighting fixtures, marbles and glass will be recovered for refurbishing and use in other projects


5. Donate recyclable/reusable or residual materials to local community groups, institutions and individual local residents or home owners.


6. Use of durable, long-lasting materials that will not need to be replaced as often, thereby reducing the amount of construction waste generated over time


7. Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure to the elements


8. Use building materials that have minimal or no packaging to avoid the generation of excessive packaging waste


Solid waste generation (Lead Acid Batteries)


Segregate batteries from paper, rags, garbage, flammables, scrap metal or hazardous chemicals by means of a dike, berm, wall or other physical barrier.


Store spent lead acid batteries on an impervious surface (such as concrete that has been sealed to protect the surface from degradation or on a leak-proof plastic containment pallet).


4. Reduce dust emissions


Dust emission


1. Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations


2. Avoid excavation works in extremely dry weathers


3. Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles


4. Personal Protective equipment to be worn


5. Minimization of exhaust emissions


Exhaust emission


1. Vehicle idling time shall be minimized


2. Alternatively fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained


3. Sensitize truck drivers to avoid unnecessary racing of vehicle engines at loading/offloading points and parking areas, and to switch off or keep vehicle engines at these points


6. Minimization of Noise and Vibration


Noise and vibration


1. Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.


2. Sensitize construction drivers to avoid gunning of vehicle engines or hooting especially when passing through sensitive areas such as churches, residential areas and schools


3. Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation


4. Ensure that all generators and heavy duty equipment are insulated or placed in enclosures to minimize ambient noise levels.


5. The noisy construction works will entirely be planned to be during day time when most of the neighbours will be at work.


7. Minimization of Energy Consumption


Increased energy consumption


1.Ensure electrical equipment, appliances and lights are switched off when not being used


2. Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy


8. Minimize water consumption and ensure more efficient and safe water use


High Water Demand


1. Promptly detect and repair of water pipe and tank leaks


2. Ensure taps are not running when not in use


3. Install a discharge meter at water outlets to determine and monitor total water usage


9. Minimize occupational health and safety risks


Security


Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the premises.


Personal Protective Gear (PPG)


Suitable overalls, safety footwear, dust masks, gas masks, respirators, gloves, ear protection equipment etc. should be made available and construction personnel must be trained to use the equipment


Health and safety impacts 


Implement all necessary measures to ensure health and safety of workers and the general public during operation of the housing project as stipulated in Factories and Other Places of Work Act Cap 514


First Aid


Well stocked first aid box which is easily available and accessible should be provided within the premises
Provision must be made for persons to be trained in first aid, with a certificate issued by a recognized body.

 

Fire protection
 


Fire fighting equipment such as fire extinguishers should be provided at strategic locations such as stores and construction areas.
Regular inspection and servicing of the equipment must be undertaken by a reputable service provider and records of such inspections maintained
Signs such as “NO SMOKING” must be prominently displayed within the premises, especially in parts where inflammable materials are stored

 
 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nakuru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIAH O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5748549         National Environment Management Authority.

