
				Page: 2309
GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 6066
THE COMMISSION FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
ANNUAL REPORT 2012–2013
MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIRPERSON
I have the pleasure to once again present to the people of Kenya the Commission’s Annual Re- port for the financial year 2012/2013. The report covers a watershed in the political history of our nation: the first general elections under the new Constitution of Kenya adopted in 2010, and the operationalization of the devolved system of government.
The Elections were historic as the people of Kenya had an opportunity to exercise their democratic right in the election of a President, Governors, Senators, Members of the National Assembly, Women elected to represent Counties in the National Assembly as well as members of County Assemblies. For the first time, the electoral process included the nomination of members of legislative assemblies to represent special interest groups such as the youth, persons with disabilities, as well as marginalised and minority groups. The promises of the Constitution have indeed started to be realised.
In successfully holding the first general elections under the new Constitution, notwithstanding the challenges encountered, as a nation, we have successfully run the gauntlet. In that regard, I take this opportunity to once again congratulate the people of Kenya for exercising their right to universal suffrage. I also congratulate all elected and nominated representatives. I call upon the people’s representatives to embrace transformative and servant  leadership which is only evident in their  service  to the  people and  acknowledging that  the  power vested  on them  is the  power to serve rather  than  power to rule.  In particular I draw the attention of leaders at both national and county levels to the provisions of Articles 1, 3, 10 and 73 of the Constitution. These  articles provide for,  among others, recognition of the  sovereignty of the  people of Kenya, defense of the  Constitution, and  observance of the  national values  and  principles of governance and  the responsibilities of leadership.
As a nation, the test for adherence to the Constitution is found in the words of His Excellency the President, Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta, in his inauguration speech when he stated that:
It will be confirmed when the rights of all citizens are protected through legislation that upholds the spirit of our Constitution. When women and young people are both seen and heard at the decision making table at national as well as devolved levels of government. When all communities in Kenya are confident that they have a Government that listens to and addresses their needs.
In this reporting period, CIC facilitated the finalisation of the relevant legislative and regulatory framework to oversee the electoral system and process and the devolved system of government.
The 4th of March, 2013 will go down in our history as the date on which devolved governments came into effect in the Republic of Kenya. The full implementation of the devolved system of government promises to, among other things; promote social and economic development and the provision of proximate, easily accessible services throughout Kenya. It is therefore the duty of the people of Kenya, County Governments and the National Executive to play their respective roles diligently in ensuring that the devolved system of government in Kenya is on track and that it becomes a bench mark for the region and the world. The Commission undertakes to diligently discharge its function to monitor the effective implementation of the devolved system of go- ornament.
This report gives highlights of the activities undertaken in the reporting period, the challenges experienced in the course of implementing the Constitution, and consequential recommendations. I can report with  confidence that  while  implementation of the Constitution is firmly  on course, there  are challenges and potential impediments that must  be addressed firmly  and decisively to avoid pitfalls  in the implementation process. It is our duty as the people of Kenya to individually and collectively uphold, promote and protect the Constitution.
We  at the Commission could  not have  achieved our mandate without the support and  cooperation  from  the  people of Kenya, state  organs, non-state actors,  and  development partners. As I acknowledge and  appreciate the hardworking staff  of the Commission, on their  behalf, I take this  opportunity to thank  all individuals who,  and  institutions that,  directly  or indirectly play  a role in ensuring that the Commission effectively discharges its mandate and that the Constitution implementation process remains on course.
CHARLES NYACHAE,
Chairperson.
STATEMENT FROM THE SECRETARY / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution has benefited from the support of a strong Secretariat since its establishment in January 2011. The Secretariat has played a central role in the management and co-ordination of activities necessary for the Commission to fulfill its mandate. These include day-to-day administration and management, studies and research among other functions of the Commission.
In order to effectively discharge its mandate, the Commission has continued to strengthen its Secretariat, building the capacity by recruiting additional technical staff;   establishment and strengthening of a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Department; and targeted training and skills development and team building sessions. This has fostered synergy and teamwork amongst Commissioners and staff.
During the reporting period, the Commission continued to receive technical support from various government institutions including the then Ministry of Justice, National Cohesion & Constitutional Affairs (MoJNCCA), Kenya Law Reform Commission (KLRC), the Office of the Attorney General and Parliament.
The Commission also appreciates the support provided by various development partners towards actualization of its mandate. This support has come  in the form  of technical assistance in legislative  drafting, review  of policies  and  development of documents; budgetary support; and  the finalization of  the  Commission’s Strategic Plan  2013-2015. The  development partners include the  Government of  Japan,  The  Royal  Netherlands Government, Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA),  Gautsche Gesellschaft für  Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ),  Danish  International Development Agency (DANIDA), United States  Agency for  International  Development (USAID), United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),  United Nations Office of the High  Commissioner for Human Rights  (OHCHR), International Development Law Organization (IDLO),  World Wide  Fund for Nature  (WWF), Open Society Initiative  for Eastern  Africa  (OSIEA)  and State  University of New York  (SUNY-Kenya).
Through the Commission’s stewardship, many strides have been achieved in the implementation of the Constitution. These achievements have been mainly in the development of legislation
Required for the implementation of the Constitution. However, a lot still needs to be done, especially in the development of policies, administrative procedures and in inculcating a culture of constitutionalism amongst all Kenyans. To this end, the Commission has re-focused its Strategic Approach with emphasis on enhancing its internal effectiveness and accountability; increasing compliance with the Constitution among state actors and strengthening engagement of citizens and non-state actors in monitoring and facilitating the implementation of the Constitution. This approach is expected to entrench a culture of constitutionalism in public and non-state institutions.
The Commission is committed to continuously collaborate with various implementing agencies, public sector partners, Constitutional Commissions, Independent Offices and non-state stake- holders to ensure full and sustainable implementation of the Constitution.
It is expected that the Report for the period July 2012-June 13 will not only indicate the progress achieved in the implementation of the Constitution, but it will also highlight opportunities for collaboration towards realization of the letter and spirit of the Constitution.
ESTHER  D. KODHEK (MRS.),
Ag. Secretary/Chief Executive Officer.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
On the 27th  of August 2013, Kenya  celebrates the third  anniversary of the promulgation of the Constitution. The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (CIC)  was established as a constitutional commission mandated to  monitor, facilitate and  oversee the  development of  legislation and  administrative procedures required to  implement the  Constitution, and  to monitor the effective implementation of the devolved system  of government. Along with  other constitutional commissions and  independent offices, CIC  is expected to protect the sovereignty of the people, secure the observance by all State Organs of democratic values and principles and to promote constitutionalism.
When undertaking its work,  the  Commission was guided by its refined Strategic Plan in which the  Commission’s Vision  is: “A united, peaceful and prosperous Kenya in which all leaders re- respect the rule of law, uphold national values and live by the constitution”. The Commission’s mission is to: “Ensure policies; laws administrative procedures and institutional frameworks are consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitution.” The three  Key Result  Areas  that guided discharge of CIC’s functions are:
Result 1   A respected, well-functioning and independent Commission effectively delivering on its mandate.
Result 2   Increased constitutional compliance among state actors.
Result 3   Citizens and non-state actors  engaged in monitoring and facilitating the implementation of the Constitution.
To achieve  the defined results,  the Commission has adopted a thematic approach as presented below:
Citizenship and the Bill of Rights
Land  and Environment
Public  Service  and Leadership
Representation of the People  and the Legislature
Executive and Security
The Judiciary and Constitutional Commissions
Devolved Government
Public  Finance
The Chairperson’s office coordinates the eight  thematic areas and the Chairperson is the spokes- person of  the  Commission. The  Secretariat to the  Commission is headed by a Secretary/Chief Executive Officer and is structured into two departments. These are the Programmes Department that offers  technical support to the Commission and the Management Services  department that provides administrative support to the Commission.
During this reporting period, the constitutional milestones realised  were:
•       The first General Elections under the Constitution of Kenya  2010  held on March 4th 2013  in accordance with the Constitution and election laws.
•       The hearing and  determination by the Supreme Court of Kenya  of presidential election petitions.
•       The coming into being  of the bicameral Parliament consisting of the Senate and the National Assembly as provided for in Chapter 8 of the Constitution;
•       The composition of the first Cabinet and National Executive under the Constitution guided by constitutional principles including gender equity.
•       Establishment of the  two  levels of government; the  National and  County governments.
•       Commencement of the transition to the devolved system  of government as pro- vided for in Chapter 11 and Section 15 of the 6th Schedule to the Constitution of Kenya  2010.
In this context, the achievements realized by CIC  during the reporting period were:
(i)       Development and Review of Policies: CIC  facilitated development and  review of sectorial  policies  to align  them  to the  objectives and  values  of the  new  constitutional dispensation. The Commission also participated in forums working on the development of policies  and plans.
(ii)     Development of Legislation: The Commission facilitated development of all legislation  whose constitutional deadline is August 27,  2013  and  fast-tracked some Bills because of their importance in the implementation of the Constitution.
(iii)    Commencement of an audit of all legislation enacted between September 2011 and  January 2013,forcompliance with  the  Constitution. This process will continue into the next financial year.
(iv)    Development and Review of Administrative Procedures: The  Commission monitored, facilitated and oversaw the development of some  regulations, rules and guidelines to give effect to legislation enacted.
(v)     Public Advisories: CIC issued several public  advisories and press statements during the reporting period to bring  to the attention of Kenyans issues affecting the realization  of the letter  and spirit of the Constitution.
(vi)    Judicial Intervention: CIC sought judicial intervention in seven cases for   interpretation  of constitutional provisions.
(vii)  Engagement with Citizens and other Non-State Actors: The Commission continued to work  to promote public  participation and consultations in all its work  and across  government.
(viii) The 4th March, 2013 General Elections: These  were  the  first  General Elections under the Constitution of Kenya. The elections involved  six elective  posts.  It was the most  complex election to be undertaken in Kenya. The Commission was involved  at three  stages:
(a)      Monitoring nominations by political  parties.
(b)     Monitoring the preparation for Elections by the IEBC. c.   Observing the General Election.
(ix)  Implementation of the Devolved System of Government: In line with its man- date,  the Commission monitored implementation of the devolved system  of government  during the reporting period. Specifically, CIC:
(a)      Reviewed devolution and public  financial management related laws and regulations.
(b)     Undertook County visits and thereafter engaged with the relevant actors  to ad- dress emerging gaps observed.
(c)      Engaged with Senators and Governors to address opportunities and concerns in the implementation of the devolved system  of government.
(x)   Working with the Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices: CIC continued to work  with  other  constitutional commissions in accordance with    Section  5(6)(d)  of the  Sixth  Schedule to the  Constitution to ensure that  the  letter  and spirit  of the  Constitution is respected. Initiatives  in this collaboration have  involved not only leveraging existing  collaboration modalities but also working with these  institutions to agree  upon a more  structured engagement to support implementation of respective institutional mandates.
Impediments and challenges experienced during the reporting period included:
(i)       Enactment of legislation without following the due  process as provided for in Article 261(4) of the Constitution.
(ii)     Laws enacted with fundamental constitutional flaws.
(iii)    The undermining of constitutional mandates of Commissions and Independent Offices.
(iv)    Challenges related to the  implementation of a devolved system  of government as provided for in the Constitution, and in particular;
•    Lack of clear, sequenced and consensually agreed roadmap for the transition to devolved system  of government.
•    Delays  in undertaking functional analysis  and costing of functions.
•    Rushed transfer of functions as opposed to asymmetrical transfer as envisaged  in the Constitution.
•    Delayed establishment of County structures that would implement the Constitution.
•    Tension between the National Assembly and the Senate over their respective mandates.
•    Delayed release  of funds to Counties by the National Government.
(v)   Resistance to change and a continuing culture of impunity.
(vi)  Limited public  participation in the implementation of the Constitution.
Despite these challenges, CIC is committed to carrying out its mandate and will continue to work closely  with all other  stakeholders in the implementation of the Constitution in letter  and spirit.
ABBREVIATIONS
AG           Attorney General
CDF         Constituency Development Fund
CEO         Chief Executive Officer
CIC          Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution
CIOC       Constitution Implementation Oversight Committee
CRA         Commission on Revenue Allocation
DfID        Department for International Development
EACC      Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission
GIZ          Deutsche GesellschaftfürInternationaleZusammenarbeit
IDLO       International Development Law Organisation
IEBC        Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission
IRC          International Rescue Committee
IREC        Independent Review Commission
KLRC      Kenya Law Reform Commission
KNCHR   Kenya National Commission for Human Rights
KRA        Key Result Areas
NLC         National Land Commission
PSC          Public  Service Commission
RPP          Registrar of Political Parties
SIDA       Swedish International Development Co-operation Agency
SRC         Salaries and Remuneration Commission
TA           Transition Authority
UK           United Kingdom
UNDP      United Nations Development Programme
UNHCR   United Nations High  Commission for Refugees
USAID     United States  Agency for International Development
WWF       Worldwide Fund  for Nature
CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
The  Constitution sets the foundation for improved governance, political  stability  and  economic prosperity in the country. It encapsulates the required transformation in the way public  services are rendered, with  a focus  on ensuring that  an empowered populace is equitably receiving ser- vices that  are delivered efficiently, effectively, economically and  with  high  standards of professional ethics.  Key tenets  of the Constitution in this regard are:
(i)       The recognition that all sovereign power belongs to the people of Kenya;
(ii)     The establishment of a devolved system  of government;
(iii)    A framework for a rights-based and  citizen- approach to  service  delivery underpinned by values and principles of good governance.
This portends a radical shift  in the  governance framework in Kenya  with  checks and  balances between the Executive, Parliament and the Judiciary.
To give effect to the letter and spirit of the Constitution, the Commission for the Implementation of the  Constitution (CIC),  which is established under the  Sixth  Schedule to the  Constitution to monitor and  oversee implementation, works  with  state  and  non-state actors.  The Commission has continued to:
(a)      monitor, facilitate and oversee the enactment of legislation in line with the time- lines stipulated in the 5th Schedule of the Constitution;
(b)     monitor, facilitate and oversee the review  and development of some  of the requisite policy,  administrative procedures and institutional frameworks; and
(c)      monitor the transition to the devolved system  of government, specifically the implementation of Phase One  activities  as stipulated in the Transition to Devolved Government Act,  2012.
This is the second annual progress report by CIC covering the period July 2012  to June  2013. During this reporting period two Constitutional milestones realized were:
(a)      The first general elections under the Constitution of Kenya, 2010  were  held in the context of reviewed and realigned constitutional statutory framework.
(b)     The coming into effect of a devolved system  of government consisting of a National  Government and 47 County Governments.
This report highlights key constitutional implementation issues, including:
(a)      The advent  of the 4th March 2013  General Election and processes arising  there- from;
(b)     The operationalization of a devolved system of government;
(c)      The challenges experienced by the Commission in the discharge of its mandate and, challenges facing  the implementation of the Constitution;
(d)     Recommendations on addressing emerging challenges and e.   The financial statement of the Commission.
The Report is divided  into  five chapters. After  this introductory chapter, Chapter 2 outlines the Commission’s mandate, its strategies and  working arrangements. Chapter 3 covers  the  main achievements in the  implementation process during the  reporting period. Chapter 4 highlights key  challenges that  the  Commission experienced in implementing its mandate during the  re- porting period and  proposes recommendations on  how  to  overcome or  avoid  the  challenges experienced in 2012/2013. Chapter 5 contains the  financial statements of the  Commission for the period July 2012  to June  2013. Finally, the report contains five annexes.
CHAPTER TWO
MANDATE, STRATEGIES AND WORKING ARRANGEMENTS OF  THE COMMISSION
2.1   The Mandate and Role of the Commission
The Commission for  the  Implementation of the  Constitution (CIC)  is established under Section 5 (1) of the Sixth  Schedule to the Constitution. The  mandate of the Commission is stipulated in section 4( a), 5 (6), and 15 (2)(d)  of the Sixth Schedule, the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution Act 2010  and the Transition to Devolved Government Act,  2012. Read together, these  provisions specify  the mandate, functions and objects of the Commission as to:
(a)      Monitor, facilitate and oversee the development of legislation and administrative procedures required to implement the Constitution;
(b)     Co-ordinate with the Attorney-General and the Kenya  Law Reform Commission in preparing for tabling in Parliament, the legislation required to implement the Constitution;
(c)      Report every three  (3) months to the Constitutional Implementation Oversight Committee (CIOC), to the President of the Republic and to the People  of Kenya on:
(i)           Progress in the implementation of the Constitution;
(ii)         The preparation of the legislation required by the Constitution and any challenges  in that regard;
(iii)        The process of establishing new  commissions;
(iv)        Any impediments to the process of implementing the Constitution;
(e)    Prepare and submit an annual  report to the President and Parliament within  three months after  the end of the year to which it relates;
(f)    Work with each  Constitutional Commission to ensure that the letter  and spirit of the Constitution is respected;
(g)    Monitor and oversee the transition process to devolved government and ensure that the system  of devolved government is implemented effectively; and
(h)   Exercise  such  other  functions as are provided for by the Constitution or any other written law.
The Commission is further obligated to  meet  the  objects of  Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices as set out in Article  249  (1) of the Constitution, which are to:
(a)      Protect the sovereignty of the people;
(b)     Secure the observance by all State  organs of democratic values and principles; and
(c)      Promote constitutionalism.
In discharging its functions, CIC,  as a state organ, is under an obligation to observe and adhere to the national values  and  principles of governance set out  in Article  10(2)  of the Constitution, which are:
(a)      Patriotism, national unity,  sharing and devolution of power, the rule of law, democracy and participation of the people;
(b)     Human dignity, equity, social justice,  inclusiveness, equality, human rights, non-discrimination and protection of the marginalized;
(c)      Good governance, integrity, transparency and accountability; and d.   Sustainable development.
The Commission has integrated these  national values  and  principles into  its operational procedures  and institutional structure.
2.2   The Commission’s Strategic Direction
To carry out its work,  the Commission developed an interim strategic plan whose review  during this reporting period culminated in a 2013  – 2015  CIC  Strategic Plan. This review  was informed by:
(a)      The Transition to the Devolved System of Government following the successful conclusion of Presidential and General Elections in March, 2013, and
(b)     The need  to upscale the Commission’s efforts to entrench a Constitutional focus that endures beyond the CIC  term  of office.
Presented below  is the Commission’s strategic direction as articulated in the plan.
Vision
A united, peaceful and  prosperous Kenya  in which all citizens  including leaders  respect the rule of law, uphold national values and live by the Constitution.
Mission
To ensure policies, laws,  administrative procedures and  institutional frameworks are consistent with the letter  and the spirit of the Constitution.
Key Result Areas
The Commission has adopted a results-based management approach for its strategic directions and defined three  Key Result  Areas  (KRA)  as shown below, to guide  in planning, execution and monitoring of its programmers.
Table  1: CIC’s Key Result  Areas

Result 1
Result 2
Result 3


A respected, well-functioning and independent Commission effectively delivering on its mandate.


Increased constitutional compliance among state actors.


Citizens and non-state actors  engaged in monitoring and facilitating the implementation of the Constitution.

2.3   Working Arrangements
The  Commission has  adopted appropriate organization structures and  processes, operating at two  main  levels:  the  Commission and  the  Secretariat respectively. The  secretariat has  two  directorates, namely the  Programmes and  Management  Services. The  Programmes directorate has among other  responsibilities, the coordination of the Commission’s programmes as well as organisational development and  institutional strengthening.  The  Directorate of  Management Services  has  responsibility for  human resources, procurement, finance, accounts, Hansard, Information Communication Technology (ICT),  legal, planning and records management support. Annexes 3 and 4 provide lists of members of the Commission and its Secretariat, respectively.
The  Commission conducts its  programmes through eight  thematic areas  based  on  thematic chapters of the Constitution as follows:
1.  Citizenship and the Bill of Rights Thematic Area: This coordinates the implementation of Chapters 3 and 4 of the Constitution, on citizenship and the Bill of Rights,  respectively.
2.  Land and Environment Thematic Area: This coordinates the implementation of Chapter 5 of the Constitution on land and environment.
3.  Public Service and Leadership Thematic Area: This coordinates the implementation of Chapter 6 on leadership and integrity and Chapter 13 of the Constitution on public  service.
4.  Representation of the People and the Legislature Thematic Area: This co- ordinates the implementation of Chapters 7 and 8 of the Constitution on representation of the people and the legislature respectively.
5.  Executive and Security Thematic Area: This coordinates the implementationof Chapters 9 and 14 of the Constitution that deal with the executive and security respectively.
6.  The Judiciary and Constitutional Commissions Thematic Area: This coordinates  the implementation of Chapter 10 on the judiciary  and Chapter 15 on Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices.
7.  Devolved Government Thematic Area: This coordinates the implementation of Chapter 11 of the Constitution and Section 15 (2) (d)  of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, which deal with devolution.
8.  Public Finance Thematic Area: This coordinates the implementation of Chapter12 of the Constitution, which deals with public  finance management.
The Chairperson’s office plays an overarching role of linking  the eight  thematic areas: facilitating their  legislative  development support, monitoring and  auditing, research, learning and  knowledge  management support. The  Office also  coordinates the  Commission’s engagement with the  public  and  the  media  to ensure effective public  participation in the  implementation of the Constitution. The Chairperson in terms  of the CIC  Act is the spokesperson of the Commission.
2.4   Implementation Activities
In the  context of  its mandate as set  out  in the  Constitution and  other  guiding Constitutional provisions, the Commission has interpreted its key tasks to include:
(a)      Co-ordinating with the Attorney-General and the Kenya  Law Reform Commission in preparing Bills for tabling in Parliament;
(b)     Coordinating with the AG and KLRC, as well as CIOC and other  parliamentary committees to ensure timely  enactment of legislation;
(c)      Facilitating, monitoring and overseeing the development of policies  administrative procedures and institutional frameworks to anchor the legislation required to implement the Constitution;
(d)     Facilitating, monitoring and overseeing the review of existing  laws, policies, administrative procedures, and institutional frameworks to align them  with the Constitution;
(e)      Facilitating participation of the people of Kenya  in the development and review  of legislation, policy,  administrative procedures and institutional frameworks for the implementation of the Constitution and
(f)      Ensuring that the legislative  process adheres to the provisions of Article  261  of the Constitution and the timelines envisioned in the Fifth Schedule.
CHAPTER THREE
ACHIEVEMENTS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
The core mandate of CIC entails working with all stakeholders to respect, defend and uphold the letter and spirit of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. Engendering this culture of constitutionalism requires that necessary policies, legislation, and administrative procedures are in place.  Addition- ally it requires that effective mechanisms are instituted for citizens  and other  non-state actors  to hold  the  Government to account as well as to provide oversight on the  implementation of the Constitution.
This Chapter highlights the  achievements for  the  period July  2012–June 2013, focusing on achievements made  with regard to:
(a)      Increased constitutional compliance within  Government
(b)     Engaging citizens  and other  non-state actors  in monitoring and facilitating the implementation of the Constitution
(c)      General elections of 2013
(d)     Transition to the Devolved System of Government
(e)      Working with Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices f.   Fulfilling of CIC  reporting obligations
3.1 Increased Constitutional Compliance by the Government
Enumerated here  below  are achievements in constitutional compliance within  Government.
3.1.1 Facilitated Development and Review of Policies and Plans
Policies  are  necessary to guide  both  the  formulation of  statutes and  their  implementation. As such,  during this reporting period, the  Commission prioritized the  development and  review  of policies  predicated on  the  objects and  values  of  the  Constitution of  Kenya. Primarily  the  bulk of the  Commission’s work  in this context was ensuring that  the  policies  took  into  account the devolved system  of government, recognising the devolution of functions as provided for in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.
Highlighted below  are the specific policies  that CIC  participated in development and review:
(i)       Health Policies – The  Commission audited the  following three  policy  documents and forwarded its recommendations to the relevant Health  Ministries: Draft  Kenya Health  Policy  2012  – 2030, Universal  Health  Coverage Policy  and  a Position  Paper on  the  establishment and  granting of  operational autonomy to  National Health Referral Facilities.  The recommendations forwarded on the need  to ensure the progressive realization of the right  to health  within  the context of National and County Government functions as provided for in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution
(ii)     Kenya Human Rights Policy and Action Plan—The  Policy and  Action Plan pro- vide a framework for the integration and mainstreaming of human rights  in development planning, implementation and  evaluation in all sectors. The  Commission reviewed this policy and forwarded its recommendations to the Ministry. The Policy was subsequently approved by Cabinet.
(iii)    Draft Policy Framework for Education and Training—The  purpose of  the framework is to  reform the  education and  training sectors in Kenya  in line  with the Constitution. The Commission is currently reviewing the Policy to ensure that it meets  the requirements of the letter  and spirit of the Constitution.
(iv)    The Medium Term Plan 2013-2017—This is a policy  document that  sets out  the road map towards realization of the Kenya  Vision 2030  and the Constitution of Kenya, 2010. During this reporting period the Commission participated in the review  of the Policy  as well as the monitoring and  evaluation framework. The Commission’s recommendations focused on  mainstreaming a citizen- and  values-driven approach in all sectors across  the political, social,  economic and enabling pillars.
(v)     National Council on Administrative Justice (NCAJ) Strategic Plan—The Nation- al Council on Administrative Justice,  comprising of state and non-state actors,  and of which CIC  is a member, developed a strategic plan  to guide  the administration of justice.  The  plan  identified priority  policies, legislation and  administrative procedures  for increased coordination and quality  service  delivery  in the justice  sector.
The Commission also participated in forums working on policies  such as language policy and the national anti-corruption policy.
3.1.2  Facilitated Development and Review of Legislation
The Commission facilitated the development of legislation in line with  the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution. A cumulative list of  laws  developed since  promulgation is provided in annex  1. Below is a schedule of laws developed during the reporting period organised into enacted laws, amended laws and Bills.
Table 2 Laws developed in the period July, 2012–June, 2013
 (A)  Laws

 


Legislation


Constitutional Timeline


Development Status


2012


1.


Public  Service  Commission Act,  No. 13 of 2012


Five years


Enacted in July, 2012


2.


County Governments Act,  No. 17 of 2012


18 months


Enacted in July, 2012


3.


Public  Service  Finance Management Act,  No. 18 of 2012


Two  Years


Enacted in July, 2012


4.


Leadership and Integrity Act,  No. 19 of 2012


Two  years


Enacted in August, 2012


5.


Teachers Service  Commission Act,  No. 20 of 2012


Five Years


Enacted in August, 2012


6.


Assumption of Office of the President Act,  No. 21 of 2012


Two  Years


Enacted in August, 2012


7.


Petitions to Parliament (Procedure) Act,  No. 22 of  2012


Two  years


Enacted in August, 2012


8.


National Security Council Act,  No. 23 of  2012


Two  years


Enacted in August, 2012


9.


Kenya  Defence Forces  Act,  No. 25 of  2012


Two  years


Enacted in August ,2012


10.


National Service  Intelligence Act,  No. 28 of  2012


Two  years


Enacted in August, 2012


11.


Treaty  Making and Ratification Act,  No. 45  of 2012


Five Years


Enacted in December, 2012


2013


12.


National Government Coordination Act,  No. 1 of  2013


Five years


Enacted in January, 2013


13.


Transition County Allocation of Revenue Act , No 6 of
2013)Enacted in January 2013


 


 


14.


Transition County Appropriation Act No. 7 of 2013


 


Enacted in January, 2013


15.


The County Governments Public  Finance Management
Transition Act,  No. 8 of 2013


 


Enacted in January, 2013


16.


Kenya  Law Reform Commission Act,  No. 19 of 2013


Five years


Enacted in January, 2013

(B)   Amendment Acts

 


Legislation


Enactment period


2012


1.


Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) No. 2 Act, 2012


Enacted in July, 2012


2.


Elections (Amendment) Act No. 31 of 2012


Enacted in October, 2012


3.


Elections (Amendment (No.2)  Act No. 32 of 2012


Enacted in October, 2012


4.


Vetting of Judges and Magistrates (Amendment) Act, No. 43 of  2012


Enacted in December, 2012


5.


Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) (No 2) Act No. 47 of 2012


Enacted in December, 2012


6.


Elections (Amendment) (No.3)  Act No. 48 of 2012


Enacted in December, 2012


7.


Political  Parties (Amendment) Act No. 50 of 2012


Enacted in December, 2012

(C)   Published  Bills

 


Bills


Constitutional Timeline


Status


1.


Marriage Bill 2013


Five years


Published on 5th July, 2013


2.


Matrimonial Property Bill, 2013


Five years


Published on 5th July, 2013


3.


Election Campaign Financing Bill, 2013


Five years


Published on 5th July, 2013


4.


National Police  Service  Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2013


None


Published on  16th  July, 2013


5.


The Media  Council Bill, 2013


Three  years


Published on 22nd July, 2013


6.


The Kenya  Communications and Information
(Amendment), Bill, 2013


Three  years


Published on 22nd July, 2013


Bills Pending Publication


7.


Protection against  Domestic Violence Bill


Five years


Submitted to the AG   on 21st September, 2012for publication and tabling in Parliament


8.


Access  to Information Bill


Five years


Submitted to the AG   on 5th December, 2012for publication and tabling in Parliament


9.


Data Protection Bill


Five years


Submitted to the AG  on 5th December, 2012  for publication and tabling in Parliament


10.


Contempt of Court Bill,


Five years


Submitted to the AG  on 20th May,  2013  for publication and tabling in Parliament


11.


Controller of Budget Bill,


Five years


Submitted to the AG on 9th November, 2012for publication and tabling in Parliament


12.


Magistrates Court (Amendment) Bill,


Five years


Submitted to the AG  on 20 May, 2013  for publication and tabling in Parliament


13.


Mining Bill,


Five years


Submitted to the AG  on 19th June,  2013for publication and tabling in Parliament


14.


National Coroners Service  Bill,


Five years


Submitted to the AG  on 23rd July, 2013  for publication and tabling in Parliament


15.


Private Security Industry Regulation Bill,


Five years


Submitted to the AG   on 5thAu- gust, 2013  for publication and tabling in Parliament


16.


Legal  Aid Bill


Five years


CIC  received an advance copy  of the Bill from  the then   Ministry of  Justice,  National Cohesion and Constitutional Affairs   awaiting submission of the final version  of the Bill by the Attorney General to CIC  for review


17.


National Registration and Identification Bill,


Five years


Under review  by CIC


18.


Refugees Bill


Five years


Under review  by CIC


19.


The Water Bill


Five years


Under review  by CIC

3.1.3 Audit of Existing Legislation, Policies and Administrative Procedures
(i)       General Audit of Legislation: The Commission commenced an audit  of all legislation  enacted between September 2011  and  January 2013, for  compliance with the Constitution. At the time of reporting, this process is on-going and will continue into the next financial year.
(ii)     Audit of Existing National Policies, Strategies and Legislative Instruments Relating to Access to Justice in Kenya: During the  period between September and  November 2012, CIC  carried  out  an analysis  of access  to justice  in the judicial system  with  a view  to  ascertaining: (i) The  gaps  in policy  and  legislation relating to access  to justice;  (ii) the social-economic and  other  factors that  impede full and equal  access  to  justice  and  (iv) the  efficacy of  administrative procedures for  the administration of justice.  The report  identifies impediments and strategic interventions  designed to ensure equal  access  to justice.
(iii)    Audit of Environment and Natural Resources Policies: CIC  commissioned a study  to review  policies, laws and regulations being  implemented by the respective ministries and departments with a view of recommending alignment with the Constitution as appropriate. The study involved  stakeholders from  the environment and natural  resources (ENR) sectors. The study  identified a total of 65 policies  and laws for  review  to harmonise with  the  constitution. The  main  recommendations given were  the need  to put in place:  (a) working modalities for developing a comprehensive policy,  legislative  and institutional framework at national and county level and (b) mechanisms for involvement of private  sector, civil society  and the public  in the decision-making and management of the environment and natural  resources.
3.1.4   Development of Administrative Procedures
Proper administrative procedures, regulations and institutional frameworks are required for the implementation of sector  policies  and  legislation. During this period the  Commission reviewed various  proposed administrative procedures and regulations. The instruments reviewed are listed in Table  3.
Table 3 Regulations, Rules and Guidelines Reviewed by CIC  in 2012–2013 Financial  Years

Thematic Area


Regulations, Rules and Guidelines


Devolved Government


CIC facilitated the review  and provided input  for the preparation of the following regulations on devolution
•   Guidelines by TA on the Assumption of Office of Governors, which were used  by Governors in all the 47 counties during the assumption of office on the 27th  of March 2013
•   Regulations to give effect to the following Acts of Parliament.
1.  County Governments Act,  2012
2.  Intergovernmental Relations Act,  2012
3.  Transitions to Devolved Government Act,  2012
4.  Urban  Areas  and Cities  Act,  2011
•   CIC  issued  Circular CIC/CIRCULARS/1 of 6th June  2013  on the role of county governments and county public  entities  in the implementation of the Constitution. This circular  includes a reporting template.


Representation of the People and the Legislature


CIC  participated in the review  of various  elections related rules and regulations, including;
•   the Elections (General) Regulations, 2012,
•   the Elections (Registration of Voters)  Regulations, 2012,
•   the Elections (Voter   Education) Regulations.
•   Elections (General) Regulations, Notice  of Formula for Allocation of Party
Lists, 2013
•   Supreme Court (Presidential Election Petition)  Rules,  2013
•   The Elections (General) Regulations: Rules of Procedure on Settlement of
Disputes, 2012
•   The Elections (Parliamentary and County Elections) Petition Rules,  2013
The Commission reviewed and made  recommendations on the standing orders for County Assemblies, the National Assembly and the Senate

 

Human Rights


•   During the reporting period, CIC  reviewed and made  recommendations on the Constitution of Kenya  (Protection of Rights  and Fundamental Freedoms)  Practice  and Procedure Rules,  2013. These  rules have since been gazetted by the Chief Justice.
Embarked on the development of an Implementation Guide for Integration of Constitutional Values  and Human Rights  for Implementers in the Public  Service. The guide  will be distributed to facilitate a rights-based approach to service delivery  and implementation of the Constitution.


Land  and Environment


 
CIC  has commissioned development of a simplified version  of Chapter Five of the Constitution (Land  and Environment) for ease of understanding amongst Kenyans.


Public  Finance


 
The Commission developed a Handbook, “50  Things Every Kenyan Needs  to Know About Public  Finance Under The Constitution”. This is a citizen’s hand- book  which gives information on the management of public  finances based  on the Constitution and the Public  Finance Management Act 2012.


Security


The Commission reviewed regulations under the Kenya  Defence Forces  Act, and participated in the development of Guidelines on the exercise  of executive authority by County Governments.


Public  Service  and Leadership


The Commission worked closely with  the Public  Service  Commission in the review  of the Public  Service  Commission Act Regulations. The Public  Service Commission adopted the CIC  recommendation and is currently reviewing the Public  Service  Commission Act with  the intention of amending the same  to include functions contemplated in Article  234.  The regulations will then  be anchored on the same  Act.


Judiciary


 
The Commission reviewed and provided input  in the development of administrative  procedures for the operation of the National Council on the Administration of Justice  including the NCAJ  Policy,  Strategic Plan, Annual Work Plan and Guidelines for Court User Committees.

3.1.5   Public Advisories
Article  1 of the Constitution vests sovereign power in the people of Kenya. It provides for exercise of that  sovereign power directly  or indirectly, through elected representatives or delegation to Parliament, Judiciary, or National and  County Executives. In recognition of this sovereignty and the  fundamental right  to information (Article  35)  as well  as the  national values  and  principles of governance (Article  10), the Commission has issued  public  advisories and press statements to bring  to the  attention of Kenyans issues  affecting the  realisation of the  letter  and  spirit  of the Constitution.
During this reporting period the following public  advisories were  issued.
Table 4    Highlights of Public  Advisories Issued  During the 2012/2013 Reporting Period

Constitutional Issue


Highlights in the Public  Advisory


Outcomes


Amendments to the Elections Act, 2011; and the Political  Parties,  Act, 2011


The proposals to amend these two Acts through a Miscellaneous Amendment Act with  far reaching implications were  not in the spirit of the Constitution. Some of the amendments were aimed at serving parochial interests, including those of Member of Parliament.


Parliament effected the amendments  notwithstanding CIC  advice. CIC  has prioritised these  laws for realignment with  the constitution and has engaged stakeholders in this regard.


Appointment of the Members of the National Land  Commission


There was an inordinate delay  in appointing members of the NLC.
The NLC has the important mandate of managing public  land on behalf of the national and county governments. Delay in its appointment was a big stumbling block  in the achievement of principles set out in Chapter 5 of the Constitution.


The NLC members were  appointed on 20th  February, 2013.


Appointment of the Command of the National Police  Service


That the appointments of three officers of the same  gender (male) violated  Section 14 of the National Police  Service  Act and the values and principles set out in Articles  10, 27 and 232  of the Constitution.


The Command was appointed in accordance with  the law of two-thirds gender rule.


Constituency Development Fund (CDF)  Bill


In April 2013, the Commission issued an advisory  in which it indicated  that the Constituencies Development Fund  (CDF)  Act,  2013  was unconstitutional in that it contains provisions that fundamentally undermine the Constitution of Kenya 2010  and in particular the devolved government system. It is worth noting that the Act was enacted without the necessary consultation with  the Commission as is required by the Constitution.


The subject matter of High  Court Petition No. 71 of 2013  filed by TISA and to which CIC  is enjoined.


Division  of Revenue Bill


On 7th June 2013, the Commission issued  an advisory  regarding the role of the Senate in enactment of the Division  of Revenue Bill. The Nation- al Assembly had resolved to ignore the views by the Senate on the bill on the basis that the Bill was not meant to be considered by the Senate. Articles  96(2),  110(1)c and 218 however require the involvement of the Senate as the House that constitutionally protects the interests of the Counties in any bill that affects the finances of the counties.


The Senate filed an application in the Supreme Court seeking an advisory opinion and CIC  joined  the same  as amicus curiae.

 

The exclusion of the Senate, whose sole justification is to protect the interests of the Counties, from  having any role in the most  important Bill that affects the finances of the Counties is not only unconstitutional, but also goes  against  basic logic and reason.


 


 


Leadership and Integrity Bill


Article  80 of the Constitution re- quires  that legislation to be enacted within  2 years.   The Commission reviewed the Leadership and Integrity Bill within  the specified timeframe and forwarded it to the Office of the Attorney-General. However, the Bill which was published and enacted;
•  did not establish transparent procedures and mechanisms for effective administration of Chapter Six,
•  did not provide for the processes  of review  and appeals for persons dissatisfied with decisions of institutions vetting (Chapter Six as required by Article  47), and
• does  not provide for disciplinary mechanisms and penalties as required by Article  75  and Article 80 (b)  of the Constitution.


As a result,  CIC  filed a suit with the High  Court which determined that the matter can be addressed in subsidiary legislation.


Transfer of functions from  the National  to County Governments


On 13th  June  2013, CIC  issued  a public  advisory  on the requirements for the transfer of functions from National to County Governments as outlined in Section 15 of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution and the Transition to Devolved Government  Act,  2012.  In the advisory, CIC expressed its concern on the hurried and sometimes ad-hoc manner in which the transition process is being  carried  out.  The Commission therefore urged the various  players involved  in the process of devolution to restructure the process of transfer of functions to County Governments, to ensure that it complies with the letter  and spirit of the Constitution and law. CIC  also called on the Senate to play its role of protecting the counties and county governments, by ensuring that they get sufficient funding for the legally transferred functions, together with ensuring that the transition process is seamless.


Led to further discussions on Counties’ preparedness to take up functions assigned in the 4th
schedule, and an agreement by all stakeholders on the need  to comply with  Section 15 of the 6th Schedule to the Constitution as well as Sections  23 and 24 of the Transition to Devolved Government Act,  2012.

 

Presidential Retirement Benefits (Amendment) Bill 2012, and the Retirement Benefits (Deputy President and designated state officers) Bill, 2012


Article  230(1) of the Constitution sets the Salaries  and Remuneration Commission (SRC).  This Commission has the mandate and power to set and regularly review  the remuneration and benefits of all state officers. However in clear contravention of this Article, on 9th January, 2013, the National Assembly enacted the Presidential Retirement Benefits (Amendment) Bill 2012, and the Retirement Benefits (Deputy President and Designated State  Officers) Bill, 2012. The Commission issued  an advisory and has requested the relevant state agencies not to implement these  laws in contravention of the Constitution.


President assented to the Presidential Retirement Benefits (Amendment)  Bill, 2012. CIC  has engaged SRC  and recommended that in line with  its constitutional mandate, it set the terms  and benefits including retirements benefits.


Remuneration and Benefits of State Officers


The Commission issued  public advisories on the resolution by the National Assembly regarding the setting  of remuneration and benefits of state officers. The Commission noted that in trying  to revoke  the SRC’s  decision on the salaries of the members of parliament, the Assembly was contravening several provisions of the Constitution.


Remuneration and terms  reviewed in accordance with  the constitution.


Mining Bill


The advisory  was aimed  at informing the public  about  the contents and issues in the Mining Bill and the broader public  participation in the development of the law. Some of the key issues highlighted included: the principles of compensation; ratification of mining licenses;  the role of the NLC;  dispute resolution; and transparency.


The Mining Bill was developed, incorporating issues raised in the advisory.


Threats to Devolution


The advisory was prompted by the increasing tendency to rush through Parliament laws relating to devolution without the involvement of CIC and other  stakeholders and without adhering to the principle of public participation. A number of policies contrary to the Constitution were also being  developed or implemented by the Executive.


CIC  and the Speakers of the two houses agreed on the legislative  process to be followed in the preparation and enactment of Bills including private  members Bills.

 

Press Release/Statement issued  by the Commission


Election Checklist for Leadership and Integrity


The Constitution requires that leaders have integrity and good character.  As such before the general elections of 4th March, 2014, the Commission communicated to the people of Kenya  by way of publication  in two of the newspapers of nationwide circulation on the need  to elect leaders  who  met the threshold set out in Chapter Six of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, to enable  voters  to vote for leaders of integrity, the public  at large was advised  to consider ten critical questions  to see if their candidates met the requirements of Chapter Six.


Kenyans exercised their democratic rights  and elected leaders  of their choice.


Transition to devolved system  of government


The Statement issued  jointly  with the CRA  and TA was aimed  at informing the public  on various activities  relating to devolution legislation,  administrative procedures, finances, infrastructure, assets and human resources, as well as transfer of functions and assumption of office by Governors.


Led to further consultations on the transfer of functions


Inclusion of women, minorities and marginalised groups in National and County Government appointments.


Very few women were  elected during the 2013  General Election. The situation was even worse  for persons with  disabilities. Youth and minorities were  also under-rep-resented. To ensure that special interest groups are represented within  the National and County Governments special  measures will be needed from  all stakeholders. CIC encouraged women, Persons with  Disabilities and the Youth to apply  for job opportunities under the new  dispensation


Promoted awareness to Kenyans to ensure representation of special interest groups

3.1.4   Judicial Intervention
During this reporting period CIC  sought judicial  intervention on seven  cases,  summarized in Annex 2 in line with the provisions of:
(i)       Article  165 (3) (d) – jurisdiction of the High  Court to hear  questions on the interpretation  of the Constitution
(ii)     Article  258  - enforcement of the Constitution; and
(iii)    Article  249,  - protection and promotion of constitutionalism
A summary of cases and their status  is contained in annex  2.
3.2   Engagement with Citizens and other Non-State Actors
Public  participation is one  of  the  national values  enshrined in Article  10  of  the  Constitution. Article  118  also requires that  Parliament “facilitate public  participation and  involvement in the legislative  and other  business of Parliament and its committees.” The Commission has worked to ensure public  participation and consultations in all its work.
During the  reporting period, the  Commission engaged various  stakeholders to facilitate establishment of structured mechanisms and dialogue on implementation of the Constitution. Among the major  initiatives  during the reporting period were:
(a)  Stakeholder consultations on the development of a framework for public participation: The  Commission held  a consultative forum in September 2012, bringing together representatives from  both  Governmental and  Non-Governmental institutions to take  stock  of the state of public  participation within  the country and recommend the most suitable framework for public  participation. The meeting resolved that  a policy  on  public  participation be  developed to  give  effect to  this principle. The then Ministry of Justice,  National Cohesion and Constitutional Affairs undertook to steer the development of the policy.
(b) Consultations with other stakeholders: The Commission held various  consultative meetings with several  stakeholders including:
•    Engagement with the media: The  media  plays  a critical  role  in facilitating public  participation in governance and democracy. The Commission undertook various  activities  to sensitise  the media  on its role in helping in the implementation of the Constitution and promoting a culture of constitutionalism.
•    Meetings with civil society organisations: the  Commission participated in various  civil society  meetings during this reporting period. Issues discussed on having  common understanding of relevant constitutional provisions and linking  these  to  the  roles  of  organisations to  support implementation of  the Constitution.
•    Think-Tank conference in Belgium: The Commission participated in a think- tank conference in Brussels, Belgium, organized by Hanns  Seidel  Stiftung Foundation. The Conference focused on “Challenges of Integrity: Political  Processes and  Leadership in Kenya. Some of the recommendations given  to consider for future elections in Kenya  include: the  need  for  thorough and  timely  civic education, introduction of technology in good time  to ensure systems are working and  the  importance of  transparent voting  process, including the  tallying  and communication of  results.  The  Commission will continue working with  Hans Seidel  Foundation in areas of common interest.
3.3   The 2013 General Elections
The first General Elections under the Constitution of Kenya, 2010  took place on 4th March, 2013. The  elections involved  six (6) elective  posts  (President, Governor, Senator, Member of National Assembly, National Assembly members elected based  on provisions of Art 97 1(b), and Members of County Assembly). The General Election, which was keenly  watched in Kenya  and around the world  against  the backdrop of the violence that  erupted after  the disputed 2007  General Election,  was the most  complex the country has undertaken.
The  Commission’s role  was  mainly  observing and  monitoring various  aspects  of  the  elections, for compliance with  the Constitutional provisions, and  issuance of advisories if and  when need arose.  In particular, the Commission was involved  at three  stages:
(a)    Monitoring nominations by political parties: The Commission had,  before the date  of nominations, issued  an advisory  to political  parties,  IEBC and  the Registrar of Political Parties (RPP) on issues that needed to be adhered to during nominations pursuant to the Constitution, the Elections Act,  2011  and  the Political  Parties  Act, 2011.
Following issuance of the advisory, the Commission observed several  of the political  party  nominations to assess:
The level of knowledge and participation by members of the public,
The level of transparency and accountability in the nomination process, and
The  level  to  which the  nominations were  carried  out  within  the  law  and  the political  parties’  regulations to promote free and fair elections.
From  this exercise, the  Commission noted that  political  party  nominations experienced a number of challenges key among which were  (a) little knowledge of electoral laws by the public, (b) widespread disregard of Constitutional principles, and (c) a lack of internal party democracy with allegations of nepotism, favouritism and rigging.
(b)   Preparation for Elections by the IEBC: In its role of overseeing the implementation  of the constitution, CIC  followed keenly  IEBC  elections preparatory work.  On 24th  February 2013, IEBC  conducted a simulation of  the  election exercise  which CIC  observed. In the report forwarded to IEBC by CIC  the main  issues noted were: limited  awareness of the six elections, confusing ballot boxes and ballot papers  and their  colours, missing  Electronic Voter  Identification Devices  in some  of the polling stations  and challenges in transmitting results.
(c)    Observing the General Election: IEBC accredited the Commission as an elections observer during the  4th  March 2013  General Election, including the  observation of  the  tallying  process at the  IEBC  national tallying  Centre, Bomas  of  Kenya. The Commission’s observation of  the  2013  General Election was  aimed  at achieving three  (3) main  objectives:
Monitor whether the  General Election was  conducted in accordance with  the Constitution;
Generate lessons  to guide  the Commission in reviewing election laws and  regulations in the future.
Share  with  IEBC its findings in order  to contribute to the improvement of elections  in the future;
The  Commission deployed observers of the  General Election in 12  randomly selected counties namely: Biomet; Kajiado; Kericho; Kiambu; Kisii;  Nairobi; Meru; Machakos; Mombasa; Nandi; Nyeri;  and  Taita-Taveta. The  Commission also  sent  a member to  observe the  election process in Rwanda. Consequently the Commission is finalising an observer report to be shared  with  the IEBC and other  stakeholders in order  to inform future election processes.
3.4   Implementation of the Devolved System of Government
Implementation of  the  devolved system  of  government is a central  tenet  of  the  Constitution. The  objects and  principles of  the  devolved system  of  government are  provided for  in Articles 174 and 175 of Constitution where the focus  is on empowerment, equity  and access to services. Through devolution, the Constitution seeks  to address the governance challenges that  affected the country under a centralised system. The Kenyan devolved system  of government as stipulated in the Constitution and devolution-related laws provides for devolution of power, resources and functions from  a central  authority to two levels of government,  namely a National Government and  forty  seven  County Governments. The  governments at the  National and  County level  are recognized in Article  6 of the  Constitution as distinct  and  inter-dependent and  are required to conduct their  mutual relations on the  basis of co-operation and  cooperation. Further, the  Constitution in Articles  187  and  188  provides for  exclusive, residual and  concurrent functions of National and County Governments.
The Constitution envisages that implementation of the devolved system  of government will take at least three  years after  the first general elections under the Constitution. In line with  this provision  on  asymmetrical transfer, the  devolution related laws  stipulate a number of  sequenced activities  and  processes to ensure seamless transition. These  activities  include the  analysis  and unbundling of functions that  the  constitution assigns  to the  national and  county governments respectively; the  costing of the  functions followed by an efficient budgetary exercise; auditing assets and liabilities  of the former central  government and the former local authorities as a prelude  to sharing the  assets  and  liabilities  between the  National and  County Governments. The implementation of devolution must  also take into account the capacity of County Governments to take up the functions assigned to them  before such  functions can be transferred.
Fundamentally, implementation of  the  devolved system  of  government requires policies  to be developed, laws to be enacted by parliament as well as regulations to give it effect. Implementation  is also dependent on the functioning of a number of institutions and systems to facilitate its coming into  full  effect. Additionally, in view  of  the  complexity of  the  system  of  devolution and  the fact that  as currently designed it is a new  undertaking, critical  to its implementation,  is the effective management of the transition process including factoring in the emerging political dynamics. Moreover, it is imperative that  during the transition period emphasis is placed on institutionalization of the practice and culture of constitutionalism.
In the operationalization of  the  devolved system  of  government during the  reporting period 2012/2013 the specific achievements realized included the following.
(a)    Review of the devolved government related laws and regulations: In order to ensure that the main  laws to facilitate the operationalization of the devolved system  of government after  the 4th of March 2013  General Elections were  properly in place,  the Commission facilitated, monitored and oversaw:
•    Review  of the  Transition to County Government Appropriation Act,  2013  and the  Transition to  County Government Allocation Act,  2013  to  address public finance management in county government in the period immediately preceding the election and assumption of office of Governors, Deputy Governors and members of County Assemblies.
•    Review  of  the  County Governments’ Public  Finance Management  Transition Act,  2013  to provide a legislative  framework for  the  realisation of Article  218 of  the  Constitution and  to put  in place  mechanisms for  strengthening public finance management capacities of County Governments during the  transition phase.
•    Auditing of  various  Acts,  including the  County Governments Act,  2012; the
Intergovernmental Relations Act,  2012; the Urban  Areas  and  Cities  Act,  2011; Transition to Devolved Government Act, 2012; and the Public Finance Management  Act,  2012, for consistency and confirming compliance with the Constitutional  requirements for devolution.
•    Review of regulations to  give  effect to  the  following Acts  of  Parliament: (i) County Governments Act, 2012; (ii) Intergovernmental Relations Act, 2012; (iii) Transition to Devolved Government Act,  2012  and  (iv) Urban  Areas  and  Cities Act,  2011
(b)      Monitoring Transition to the Devolved System of Government:
•    Development of a reporting framework: The Commission engaged key institutions involved  in the  transition process, including the  Transition Authority (TA),  the  Commission on  Revenue Allocation (CRA), the  Public  Service  Com- mission  (PSC),  the  Ministry of Finance, Office of the  Controller of Budget and the  Auditor General’s office, to facilitate a smooth transition process that  adheres  to the  Constitutional timelines and  requirements for  devolution. TA,  as the mechanism through which CIC oversees transition to devolution, is required by the  Transition to Devolved Government Act,  2012  to submit reports to the Commission and  to  the  CRA,  among other  state  organs, on  the  progress of transition. To facilitate this process, the Commission, during the reporting period, developed a reporting template for use by TA.
•    Undertaking County visits: Section 15 (2) (d)  of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution mandates Commission to monitor effective implementation of the devolved  system  of government. In March and May 2013, the Commission visited randomly selected counties. The  purpose of the  visits was to identify progress made  so far in the implementation of the devolved system  of government, any gaps in the process and challenges. Specifically the county visits focused on the following issues among others:
•    Uptake  of   service   delivery   responsibility- ties by County Governments of functions transferred to County Governments immediately after  the  first  elections under the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.
•    Plan on delivery  of functions and the necessary institutional mechanism to execute the functions.
•    Legal framework relating to the functions to be delivered.
•    Administrative units  related to  the  functions.
•    Further decentralization of  the  function and provision of related services  by the county government.
•    Financial  management systems
•    Budgeting process by counties for  the  financial  year 2013  / 2014.
•    Inter-governmental relations.
•    Recognition  of   the   distinctiveness  of   the two  levels  of  government in  execution of functions assigned.
•    Relationship between  the  Senate and  the County Assemblies.
•    Operationalization of Urban  Areas  and  Cities.
•    Financing of County Governments.
•    Capacity Building for County Governments.
•    County governance unit (Executive commit- tees and County services  boards).
•    Capacity assessment in relation to the function allocated to County Governments.
•    Transition implementation plans.
•    Integration  of  national  values   and   principles in particular Art 10, 201 and 232 at the County level
During the visits, CIC  made  the following observations;
•    None of the Phase One Activities had been completed: The Fourth Schedule of the Transition to Devolved Government Act of 2012  stipulates two phases of transition i.e.,  a period running before the  first  elections under the  Constitution and  one  thereafter up  to  the  end  of  the  three-year transition period. The Act provides for seventeen activities  to be undertaken by the Transition Authority during phase  one  and  four  activities  in the  second phase. Activities in the  second phase  include completion of any activity  that  may  be outstanding  after  Phase  One.  During the  county visits CIC  observed that  none  of  the required Phase  One  activities  had  been  conclusively carried  out.  For  example, the  required analysis  of  functions and  competency assignment had  not  been completed and neither had a plan for distribution of functions and competency been  developed. Additionally the  audit  of  assets  liabilities,  infrastructure and staff had not been  undertaken.
•    Transfer of Functions: The Commission observed that despite the initial transfer  of  functions under Section 23 (1)  of  the  Act,  most  of  the  Counties visited had not taken  up the functions transferred, with the only visible function being revenue collection within  the  Counties. Further, CIC  noted with  concern, low levels of awareness within  and lack of a common understanding between, National  and County Governments on how  these  functions would be undertaken within  the context of a devolved system  of government.
•    Legislation: The  Commission established that  none  of the  County Assemblies had  enacted any legislation relating to the  transferred functions nor  had  they adapted and  adopted existing  statutes dealing with  the  functions. It was  ob- served  that  in undertaking their  functions, the  Counties were  guided by  the existing  Acts  of  Parliament, particularly the  public  finance management and devolution-related acts.  However, there  were  some  Counties that  had  started developing laws,  e.g.,  Vihiga  County was  working on  its  Appropriation  Bill, 2013.
•    Establishment of the required institutional frameworks: It was observed that  some  Counties had  already  established County Assembly service  boards and  County public  service  boards. Further, it was  noted that  no  County had established units  of further decentralization.
•    Public Financial Management in the Counties: County Governments were in the  process of  establishing the  required public  finance management (PFM) structures as well  as undertaking their  budgetary processes. The  Counties visited  indicated that  there  were  significant financial gaps  where, for  example, they  lacked  funding to cater  for  their  infrastructural needs, office space,  and equipment for service  provision. Additionally, it was observed that  most  of the Counties visited required support to operationalize the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS).
•    Capacity Gaps: Capacity gaps were  observed with regard to human resources as well as the infrastructure required for service  delivery.
Following these  observations, CIC  has engaged with  all relevant actors  including the Council of County Governors, the Transition Authority and the National Government to address such  gaps as were  identified and  to strengthen the  transition process with  due  regard to the  need  for  a seamless delivery  of services.
(c)    Participating in the first national conference for gubernatorial candidates: The  Transition Authority organised a national conference for  gubernatorial candites  that brought together more  than  400  aspiring Governors from  different po- litical parties.  CIC participated in the planning meetings as well as in the conference sessions  to  sensitise  the  aspirants of  the  duties  and  responsibilities of  Governors and county governments under the Constitution and relevant laws.
(d)   Capacity building framework for the devolved system of government: The Commission participated in  the  development of  a capacity building framework. This  framework spearheaded that  was  by  the  Transition Authority, aimed  at ad- dressing institutional development, organisational capacity development and  professional development for  improved performance to  support implementation of the devolved system  of government.
(e)    Issuance of guidelines to County Governments to guide implementation of the devolved system of government: The Commission in consultation with the Council of Governors issued  a circular  on the role of County Governments and county public  entities  in the implementation of the Constitution. This circular  aims to advice  all County Governments and county public  entities  on the modalities and process for  implementation of the  Constitution of Kenya, 2010. It includes development of:
(i)       Change management strategies;
(ii)     Transition plans and progress reports on implementation of the devolved system of government;
(iii)    Public  participation mechanisms. The circular  also included a reporting tem plate for Counties.
(f)    Engaging the Senate to buttress fulfillment of its mandate: The Senate, in various  provisions of the  Constitution (Articles  96(1)(2)(3)(4), 217,  109  to 113)  is mandated to protect the  interests of  the  counties and  provide oversight to their operations. Given  this  mandate, the  Commission has  had  various  meetings with Senate including:
A retreat  (May 17–18) attended by senators, CIC and CRA,  as the first in  series of planned meetings, to discuss  the “Role  of the Senate in effective implementation of devolution” and;
Attending various  committees of the Senate to address emerging opportunities and concerns in the implementation of the devolved system  of government.
(g)    Engaging with Governors and the Council of County Governors: In addition to meeting with  the Governors during the County visits, CIC  has made  concerted efforts to  meeting with  the  Governors and  the  Council of  County Governors to review  the  practical experiences in the  implementation of the  devolved system  of government including the challenges encountered.
3.5   Working with the Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices
Section 5(6)(d)  of  the  Sixth  Schedule to  the  Constitution requires that  CIC  works  with  other constitutional commissions to ensure that  the  letter  and  spirit  of the  Constitution is respected. Further, all Chapter Fifteen  Commissions and independent offices in terms  of Article  249  of the Constitution have an obligation to protect the sovereignty of the people, secure the observance by all State  Organs of democratic values and principles and to promote constitutionalism. Working with these  constitutional commissions has been  through thematic areas as follows:

CIC Thematic Area Leading


Commissions/Independent Office


Citizenship and the Bill of Rights


•   Kenya  National Commission on Human Rights  (KNCHR)
•   Commission on Administrative Justice  (CAJ)
•   National Gender and Equality  Commission (NGEC)


Representation of the  People  and  the Legislature


•   Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC)
•   Parliamentary Service  Commission (PARLSCOM)


Public  Service  and Leadership


•   Public  Service  Commission (PSC)
•   Teachers Service  Commission (TSC)
•   Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC)


Land  and Environment


•   National Land  Commission (NLC)


Public  Finance


•   Commission on Revenue Allocation (CRA)
•   Salaries  and Remuneration Commission
•   Office of the Controller of Budget


Judiciary and  Constitutional Commissions


•   Judicial  Service  Commission (JSC)


Executive and Security


•   National Police  Service  Commission
•   Office of the Attorney General

During the  reporting period the  Commission continued to work  with  the  Constitutional Com- missions for full implementation of the Constitution. The work  with  the Commissions has been on engaging key actors  to ensure:
(a)      Policies which are compliant with the letter  and spirit of the Constitution;
(b)     Laws which are compliant with the letter  and spirit of the Constitution; and
(c)      Effective institutional frameworks and administrative procedures for the implementation of the Constitution.
Initiatives  in this collaboration have involved  consultative forums and County visits. The engagement  has been  at two levels:
(a)      Engagement through the “Forum of Chairpersons of Constitutional Commissions and Holders of Independent Offices”. This forum deals with governance issues of public  concern relating to the effective implementation of the Constitution.
(b)     Ad hoc initiatives  to support implementation of respective institutional mandates. To strengthen the existing  engagement mechanisms with Constitutional Commissions and independent Offices as provided for in the Constitution, CIC  developed a framework with  three  pillarsof: (i) Enhancing performance i.e.: working together to support realisation of the respective mandates; (ii) Promoting learning by enabling sharing of lessons  learnt  as well as smart  practices between Commissions and;  (iii) Fostering innovation to  address emerging opportunities and challenges.
3.6   Realization  of CIC Reporting  Obligations
The  Commission, as required under section 4 of the  CIC  Act,  prepared and  submitted its four quarterly reports to the Constitutional Implementation Oversight Committee (CIOC). The reports contain information on the progress of implementation of the Constitution, as well as on impediments  and  recommendations on  the  way  forward. Additionally, the  Commission held  several meetings with the CIOC during the reporting period to address emerging concerns in the implementation of the Constitution.
CHAPTER FOUR
CHALLENGES, IMPEDIMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
4.1   Challenges and Impediments to the Implementation of the Constitution
While  the implementation of the Constitution has achieved great  progress, there  are a number of challenges and impediments some  of which are highlighted here  below:
(i)    Policy Gaps
•    Failure to develop policy prior to preparation of Bills: Whereas it is accept- ed  by all implementation partner that  policy  should precede legislation, there continues to be widespread disregard of this as evidenced by the lack of policies to anchor the respective laws enacted to implement the Constitution.
•    Non-compliant policy: The  majority of the  implementing agencies are yet to review  existing  policies  for consistency with the letter and spirit of the Constitu- tion. Where policy has been  developed and submitted to CIC,  there  are notable gaps particularly with regards to recognising the adoption of a devolved system of government.
(ii)   Legislative Compliance
•    Enactment  of  legislation  without  following  the  due  process:  Article261(4) requires the Attorney-General to consult with  CIC  in preparing relevant Bills for tabling before Parliament, as soon  as reasonably practicable, to enable Parliament to  enact  the  legislation within  the  period specified. Section 14  of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution requires that CIC  and CRA  be consulted when processing laws relating to the devolved system  of government (Section 2 (3) (b)  of the 6th schedule, with CIC  and CRA  given  at least thirty  days to con- sider  such  legislation. Despite these  constitutional provisions, a number of Bills were  developed and  presented to Parliament without the Commission’s input. The  rush  to pass laws without CIC  input  was particularly pronounced just be- fore  the dissolution of the 10th  Parliament. While  part  of the rush  was to pass laws required before the General Election, pressure of time cannot, in the view of CIC  be a basis for flouting the Constitution.
Listed  below  are some  of the  laws that  were  enacted without following the  process set out  in Article  261  of the Constitution.
1.   Breast  Milk Substitutes (Regulation and Control) Act (No 34 of 2012)
2.   Cancer Prevention and Control Act (No 15 of 2012)
3.   Human Resource Management Professionals Act (No 52 of 2012)
4.   Kenya  Deposits Insurance Act (No 10 of 2012)
5.   Kenya  Plant Health  Inspectorate Service  Act (No 54 of 2012)
6.   Kenya  School of Government Act (No 9 of 2012)
7.   Kenya  School of Law Act (No 26 of 2012)
8.   Legal Education Act (No 27 of 2012)
9.   Micro  and Small Enterprises Act (No 55 of 2012)
10. National Transport and Safety  Authority Act (No 33 of 2012)
11. Partnerships Act 2012  (No 16 of 2012)
12. Prevention, Protection and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and Affected Communities Act,  2012  (No 56 of 2012)
13. Prevention of Terrorism Act (No 30 of 2012)
14. Public  Service  Superannuation Scheme Act (No 8 of 2012)
15. Publication of Electoral Opinion Polls Act (No 39 of 2012)
16. Supplementary Appropriation Act (No 7 of 2012)
17. Agriculture, Fisheries  and Food  Authority Act (No 13 of 2013)
18. Civil Aviation Act (No 21 of 2013)
19. Constituencies Development Fund  Act (No 30 of 2013)
20. Crops Act (No 16 of 2013)
21. International Interests in Aircraft Equipment Act (No 27 of 2013)
22. Kenya  Agricultural and Livestock Research Act (No 17 of 2013)
23. Kenya  Institute of Curriculum Development Act (No 4 of 2013)
24. Kenya  National Commission for UNESCO Act (No 5 of 2013)
25. Nairobi  Centre for International Arbitration Act (No 26 of 2013)
26. National Honours Act (No 11 of 2013)
27. Public  Benefit Organizations Act (No 18 of 2013)
28. Public  Health  Officers (Training, Registration and Licensing Act (No 12 of 2013)
29. Public  Private Partnerships Act (No 15 of 2013)
30. Pyrethrum Act (No 22 of 2013)
31. Science, Technology and Innovation Act (No 28 of 2013)
32. Social Assistance Act (No 24 of 2013)
33. Supplementary Appropriation Act (No 3 of 2013)
34. Sports  Act (No 25 of 2013)
35. Statutory Instruments Act (No 23 of 2013)
36. Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act (No 29 of 2013)
•    Laws enacted with fundamental constitutional flaws: Some laws were en- acted  with fundamental constitutional flaws. An examples is the Constituencies Development Fund  Act
(iii)     Institutional Failures
•    Delayed operationalization of constitutional commissions: The  key  illustrations I this  regard were  the  delayed establishment of  the  Teachers Service Commission, the  Ethics  and  Anti-Corruption  Commission and  the  National Land  Commission.
•    Failure to engender a Rights-Based Approach: This was evidenced, for ex- ample, in:
Low levels of representation of marginalised groups: In  particular, there  were  few  women and people with  disabilities  in elective  and appointive positions, both  at National and County governments.
Limited public participation in the implementation of the Constitution: The  level of public  participation in the  development of policies, legislation  administrative procedures as well as in the broader context of Article 10 of the  Constitution remains low.  There  is lack of awareness among the population on  the  Constitution and  the  laws enacted there under. This can be attributed to: (i) the low level of awareness perhaps partially  due to gaps in the development and implementation of the Kenya  Integrated Civic  Education  (K-NICE) programme, (ii) the lack of a framework to ensure structured and broad  based  public  participation and (iii) the Government has hardly budgeted any money for civic education.
(iv)  Transition to the devolved system of governments
•    Lack of Common Understanding of Kenya’s Devolution Model: The  lack of  common or shared  understanding of  the  Kenyan model of  devolution potentially  means  that the actors  would and indeed approach the implementation differently. This may pose a danger to the effective implementation of this novel system  of governance.
•    Institutional Failures during Implementation:
Rushed transfer of functions as opposed to phased and asymmetrical transfer as envisaged in the Constitution.
Delayed establishment of County structures that would implement the Constitution. These  include County services  boards, County executive commit- tees,  and  other  structures provided for  in The  Intergovernmental Relations Act,  2012.
Failure  to  appropriately sequence and  undertake activities  as stipulated in the  Transition to Development Act  2012: The  Transition Authority has  for example failed  to carry  out  an audit  of assets  and  liabilities  of central  government and  those  of  the  defunct local  authorities as a basis  for  sharing out  these  between the national and  the county governments. Additionally, the reclassified urban  areas and cities as required has not occurred meaning that county governments cannot embark on the competitive recruitment of managers of cities municipalities as well as administrators of towns.
Delayed issuance of Transition Implementation Guidelines to National Government Ministries and County Governments.
Resource gaps
•    Failure  to  pass  laws  to  facilitate release  of  money to  Counties by  the National Government.
•    Limited capacity in some  County Governments to carry out the assigned functions.
•    Lack of synergy among actors during the implementation process as evidenced by tensions between:
The  National Assembly and  the Senate over  their  respective law-making jurisdictions. The disharmony emerged during the process of passage of Division of Revenue Act in June,  2013.
The Governors or County Governments generally and  the National Government  over the transfer of exclusive  functions and unbundling of concurrent functions.
The County Executives and County Assemblies when budgeting for the limited County resources as well as when the assembly is exercising its oversight role
(v)      Resistance to Change, the Culture of Impunity and Parliamentary Overreach
Notwithstanding widespread acceptance and  support of the Constitution, pockets of resistance remain both within  and outside Government. Examples of this include:
•    Undermining the constitutional mandates of Commissions and Independent Offices, including attacks on constitutional office holders when they perform their duties: During the reporting period, the National Assembly clearly purported to usurp  powers bestowed by the Constitution on the Salaries and  Remuneration Commission by  enacting The  Presidential Retirement Benefits (Amendment) Act,  2013  without regard to the responsible Commission.
•    Failure  to respect court  rulings  such  as in the matter of County Commissioners and the National Land  Commission, respectively.
•    Parliament is using some  of its powers especially in the budget process in ways that contravene the spirit of the Constitution.
4.2   Recommendations
Adherence of constitutional process for development of legislation: The Executive, Parliament and  Office of  the  Attorney General should adhere to  the  process of  developing and enacting legislation as provided for in Article  261(4) of the Constitution.
Audit and review of laws to align with constitution: All those laws enacted with constitutional flaws  should be identified, reviewed and  aligned with  the Constitution. The Commission has started this process and identified a number of them, which have already  been  shared  with CIOC, the AG and the National Executive. The process of review should be expedited.
Expedite transfer of functions: Leveraging on the intergovernmental mechanisms, the Transition Authority in consultation with  both  levels of the relevant Constitutional Commissions and Independent Offices should expedite the completion of all Phase One activities  as provided for in the Transition to Devolved Government Act,  2012.
Capacities at County level: In line with  the National Government function as provided in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, the National Government in consultation with  the County Governments should develop a comprehensive capacity building plan  to increase capacities in the Counties.
Change management strategies: National and County Governments should develop and implement change management strategies to inform the realization of the Transition Implementation  Plans.  Additionally, the  Governments should upscale reform efforts to enhance awareness as well as implementation of the letter  and spirit of the Constitution.
Public participation:  Development of  a public  participation policy  should be  expedited and programmes developed at all levels of Government to ensure establishment of robust public participation mechanisms.
CHAPTER FIVE
FINANCIAL REPORTS AND STATEMENTS FOR YEAR ENDED JUNE 2013
CONTENTS
•               Commission Information
•               Statement of Commission Responsibilities
•               Report of the Commission
•               Financial Statements: Appropriation Statement
Notes to the Financial Statements Statement of Appropriation In Aid Statement of Assets and Liabilities
COMMISSION INFORMATION
HEAD OFFICE
Parklands Plaza
Chiromo Lane  /Muthithi Road Junction P.O. Box 40841–00100
Nairobi
BANKERS
Central Bank Of Kenya
P.O. Box 6000
Nairobi
Kenya Commercial Bank Ltd.
Sarit Centre Branch P.O Box 182
Westlands, Nairobi
AUDITORS
Kenya National Audit Office
P.O. Box 30084 - 00100
Nairobi
STATEMENT OF COMMISSION  RESPONSIBILITIES ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE, 2013
The  Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution (CIC)  Act  2010  requires the Commission  to prepare financial statements and  operating results  at the end  of each  financial year, which gives  a true  and  fair view  of the  state  of affairs  of the  Commission. It also requires the Commission to  keep  proper accounting records that  disclose, with  reasonable accuracy, the financial position of the Commission. The  Commission also takes  responsibility of safeguarding the assets.
The Commission therefore accepts responsibility for the annual  financial statements, which have been  prepared using  appropriate accounting policies. The financial statements are supported by reasonable judgements and estimates that are in conformity with Government of Kenya  financial regulations and the generally accepted accounting principles. The Commission is of the opinion that  the financial statements give a true  and  fair view of the state of the financial affairs  of the Commission and  of its operating results.  The  Commission further accepts responsibility for  the maintenance of  accounting records, which may  be  relied  upon in the  preparation of  financial statements, as well as adequate systems of internal control.
ESTHER  D KODHEK (MRS.),
Ag. Secretary/CEO,
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION  FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE, 2013
The  Commission submits its report and  the unaudited financial statement for the financial year July, 2012-June, 2013, which shows  the state of the Commission’s affairs.
1    Auditors
The Kenya  National Audit  Office is responsible for the statutory audit  of the Commission books of account in accordance with the CIC  Act, 2010.
2. The Commission is established under section 5(6) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of Kenya 2010(COK) and section 4 of the CIC Act, 2010. The Commission has been  in existence since  January 2011. During the last financial year the Commission’s total revenue was Kshs 475  million  with an expenditure of KSh. 468  million.
The  achievements of  the  Commission included: facilitating the  development, review  of  legislation  and  administrative procedures; monitoring and  reporting on  the  implementation of  the Constitution; working with  Constitutional Commissions and  Independent Offices; monitoring the  transition to a devolved system  of government; judicial  intervention as well  as institutional development.
The Commission has defined three  Key Result  Areas  to guide  its work,  namely:
Key Result Area 1: A respected, well-functioning and independent Commission effectively delivering  on its mandate.
Key Result Area 2: Increased Constitutional compliance among state actors.
Key Result Area 3: Citizen and  Non-State actors  engaged in monitoring and  facilitating the implementation of the Constitution.
ACCOUNTING OFFICER PUBLIC FUNDS REPORT
During the financial year under review,  the Commission has been  able to coordinate and  facili- tate the formulation and enactment of all legislations and related rules and regulations required for the implementation of the Constitution within  the timelines specified in the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution. The medium term plan is to focus  on Bills with deadlines to facilitate implementation  of the Constitution. The priority  plan is on facilitating and monitoring the implementation of the devolved system  of government and ensuring increased public  participation. At this juncture, I would like to appreciate the assistance so far extended to the Commission by the National Treasury (Finance) through resources allocated to enable  CIC  achieve  its constitutional mandate.
Despite myriad  challenges, including minimum manpower and  limited  resources to carry  out its functions, I am glad to report that the Commission achieved most  of its targets in the fulfilment of its mandate.
It is also worth stating  that,  during the financial year,  there  was a transition in the Commission leadership in which the  Chief Executive Officer (CEO)  left and  I took  over  in an acting  capacity as the CEO  and Secretary to the Commission with 6 months to the end of the financial year July, 2012-June, 2013.
In conclusion it has been  an eventful year and we are grateful for what  we have achieved so far
(a)    APPROPRIATIONS ACCOUNT
APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE, 2013

Sub Vote


Approved Estimates (KSh.)


Actual Expenditure (KSh.)


Surus/Deficit (KSh.)


General Admin & planning


474,989,207.55


468,242,670.13


6,746,537.42

The Exchequer released Ksh. 458,000,000.00 during the financial year to the Commission. The Commission utilized  Kshs. 13,305,867.55, being  the amount brought forward and miscellaneous receipts of  KSh.  1,286,340.00 while  AIA  received was  KSh.  2,397,000.00. The  Commission spent  KSh.  468,367,369.20 on its programmes. The  detailed appropriation account is provided in the notes  below.
COMMISSION FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSTITUTION (CIC)
RECURRENT APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT  FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE, 2013

Head


Title


Sub Head


Item


Title


 


Approved
Estimates


Expenditure


Actual
Expenditures


Under
Expenditure


Over
Expenditure


276


 


0000


 


650 General Administration and Planning


 


 


 


 


 


0000 Head Quarters


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
Basic Wages - Temporaly Employees


 


 
2110200


 
Basic Wages - Temporaly Employees


 


 


 
91,522,774.15


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Original


130,305,867.55


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Less Supplimentary


11,705,000.00


118,600,867.55


 


118,605,867.55


 


5,000.00


 


Personal Allowance  - Paid as part of
Salary


 


 
2110300


Personal Allowance  - Paid as part of
Salary


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
Original


 
3,015,000.00


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Less Supplimentary


 
301,500.00


 
2,713,500.00


 


 
2,707,122.00


 
6,378.00


 


 


 
Utilities Supplies and services


 


 
2210100


Utillities Supplies and Services


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Original


2,100,000.00


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Less Supplimentary


210,000.00


1,890,000.00


 


1,676,579.78


213,420.22


 


 


Communication Supplies and Services


 


2210200


Communication Supplies and services


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Original


8,900,000.00


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Less Supplimentary


890,000.00


8,010,000.00


 


7,876,500.00


133,500.00


 


 


Domestic travel and Subsistence,  and
other Transport Costs


 


 
2210300


 
Domestic travel and Subsistence,  and


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Original


60,000,000.00


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Less Supplimentary


6,000,000.00


54,000,000.00


 


50,923,760.13


3,076,239.87


 


 


Foreign  travel and Subsistence,  and
other Transport Costs


 


 
2210400


 
Foreign  travel and Subsistence,  and


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Original


19,048,500.00


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Add Supplimentary


1,904,850.00


17,143,650.00


 


17,086,597.10


57,052.90


 


 


Printing, Advertising and Information
supplies and services


 


 
2210500


Printing, Advertising and Information
supplies and services


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Original


52,000,000.00


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Add Supplimentary


5,200,000.00


46,800,000.00


 


42,888,754.00


3,911,246.00


 


 


Rentals of Produced assets


 


2210600


Rentals of Produced assets


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Original


40,000,000.00


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Add Supplimentary


4,000,000.00


36,000,000.00


 


39,885,664.20


 


3,885,664.20


 


Training Expenses


 


2210700


Training Expenses


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Original


21,500,000.00


 


 


 


 


 


 


Hospitality Supplies and Services


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 
NOTES 1
Domestic Travel - 2210300
The under-expenditure of Kshs. 3,076,239.87 was occasioned by the austerity measure of postpon- ing  programmes which had  been  planned for  implementation before the  end  of the  year.  These measures were  put  in place  due  to the  budget reduction towards the  end  of the  Financial  Year. The activities  were postponed to the next financial year in order  to safeguard the Commission from getting into financial distress.
NOTES 2
Printing, Advertising and Information Supplies-2210500
The  under-expenditure of KSh.  3,911,246.00 was  occasioned by the  fact  that  the  line item  was funded by development partners.
NOTES 3
Rentals of Produced Assets – 2210600
The over-expenditure of KSh. 3,885,664.20 was occasioned by reallocation of funds from  printing and  advertising, which were  supported by  donor funds. This  enabled CIC  to  pay  a bill that  was outstanding into the next Financial  Year.
NOTES 4
Other Operating Expenses – 2211300
The under-expenditure of KSh.  1,012,112.14 was due  to part  payment of the  legal  vote  on con- tracts  that needed further clarification before full payment.
NOTES 5
Refurbishment of Buildings- 3110300
The  over-expenditure of KSh.  1 million  resulted from  completion of partitioning work  during the year and due payments that were  made  to the contractor.
NOTES 6
Purchase of Equipment and other Transport Costs- 3110700
The  over-expenditure of KSh.  1.5  million  arose  from  purchase of laptops and  other  office equip- ment  for new  staff joining  CIC  during the year under review.
NOTES 7
Purchase of Office Furniture and General Equipment – 3111000
The  over-expenditure of KSh.  1,669,424.47 was occasioned by the purchase of extra  furniture for the new  staff joining  CIC  during the course of the Financial  Year.
NOTES  8
Research, Feasibility Study and Project Preparation, Design and Supervision – 3111400
The under-expenditure resulted from  support from  donors on certain  vote lines. The same funds were  used  to meet  the deficit  in other  areas of priority.
(b) REVENUE STATEMENTS
APPROPRIATION IN AID STATEMENT

Sub Vote


D Estimates (KSh.)


Expenditure (KSh.)


AIA


2,379,000.00


2,379,000.00

The Commission managed to collect  the above  amount from  advertisement and subsequent sale of  tender documents. The  amount was  not  submitted to Treasury but  spent  on  CIC  program activities  and operational expenses.
(c)  STATEMENTS OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30th  JUNE, 2012

SUB VOTE


AMOUNT (KSh.)


GAV


TEMPORARY IMPREST


2,943,854.60


 


SALARY ADVANCE


2,684,856.22


 


BANK  BALANCES (PMG)


1,664,681.20


 


 
TOTAL AMOUNT


 
7,293,392.02


 
7,293,392.02

The assets and liabilities as at end of the financial year is as above,  with temporary imprest being
Kshs  2,943,854.60, outstanding salary advance Kshs  2,684,856.22, and  bank  balances of Kshs
1,664,681.20.
There  were  no outstanding bills at the end of the financial year June  2013
BERNARD CHERUTICH,
Head- Accounting Unit.
 

 

ANNEXES
ANNEX ONE
CONSOLIDATED LIST OF  ALL LAWS ENACTED SINCE THE PROMULGATION OF  THE CONSTITUTION

2010


1. Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution Act (No9  of 2010)


2. Animal Technician Act (No.11 of 2010)


3. Competition Act (No.12 of 2010)


2011


4. Commission on Administrative Justice  Act (No.23 of 2011)


5. Commissionon Revenue Allocation Act (No.16 of 2011)


6. Elections Acts Act (No.24 of 2011)


7. Engineers Act (No.43 of 2011)


8. Environment and Land  Court Act (No.19 of 2011)


9. Ethicsand Anti-Corruption Commission Act (No.22 of 2011)


10.   Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (No.9  of 2011)


11.   Independent Offices


12.   Independent Policing  Oversight Authority Act (No.35 of 2011)


13.   Industrial Court Act (No.20 of 2011)


14.   Judicial  Service  Act (No.1  of 2011)


15.   Kenya  Citizenship and Immigration Act (No.12 of 2011)


16.   Kenya  Citizens and Foreign Nationals Management Service  Act (No.31 of 2011)


17.   Kenya  National Commission on Human Rights  Act (No.14 of 2011)


18.   Limited Liability  Partnership Act (No.42 of 2011)


19.   Mutual Legal  Assistance Act (No.36 of 2011)


20.   National Construction Authority Act (No.41 of 2011)


21.   National Gender and Equality  Commission Act (No.15 of 2011)


22.   National Government Loans  Guarantee Act (No.18 of 2011)


23.   National Payment System Act (No.39 of 2011)


24.   National Police  Service  Commission Act (No.30 of 2011)


25.   National Police  Service  Act (No.11A of 2011)


26.   Political  Parties Act (No.11 of 2011)


27.   Power  of Mercy  Act (No.21 of 2011)


28.   Price Tourism Act (No.28 of 2011)


29.   Unclaimed Financial  Assets  Act (No.40 of 2011)


30.   Urban  Areas  and Cities  Act (No.13 of 2011)


31.   Vetting of Judges and Magistrates Act (No.2  of 2011)


32.   Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Para-Professionals Act (No.29 of 2011)


33.   Control (Essential  Goods) Act (No.26 of 2011)


34.   Prohibition of Female  Genital Mutilation Act (No.32 of 2011)


35.   Public  Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) Act,2011 (No.33 of 2011)


36.   Salaries  and Remuneration Commission Act (No.10 of 2011)


37.   Appointment Act(No.8 of2011)


2012


38.   Appropriation Act,2012 (No.11 of 2012)


39.   Assumption of the Office of the President Act (No.21 of 2012)


40.   Breast  Milk Substitutes (Regulation and Control) Act (No.34 of 2012)


41.   Cancer Prevention and Control Act(No.15 of 2012)


42.   Consumer Protection Act (No.46 of 2012)


43.   County Governments Act(No.17 of 2012)


44.   Finance Act(No.4 of 2012)


45.   Finance Act(No.57 of 2012)


46.   Intergovernmental Relations Act(No.2 of 2012)


47.   Kenya  Defence Forces  Act(No.25 of 2012)


48.   Kenya  Deposit Insurance Act(No.10 of 2012)


49.   Kenya  Examinations Council Act(No.29 of 2012)


50.   Kenya  Plant Health  Inspectorate Service  Act(No.54 of 2012)


51.   Kenya  School of Government Act(No.9 of 2012)


52.   Kenya  School of Law Act(No.26 of 2012)


53.   Land  Registration Act(No.3 of 2012)


54.   Leadership and Integrity Act(No.19 of 2012)


55.   Legal  Education Act(No.27 of 2012)


56.   National Authority for the Campaign Against Alcohol and Drug Abuse Act (No.14 of2012)


57.   National Intelligence Service  Act(No.28 of 2012)


58.   National Land  Commission Act(No.5 of 2012)


59.   National Security Council Act(No.23 of 2012)


60.   National Transport and Safety  Authority Act(No.33 of 2012)


61.   Office of the Attorney-General Act(No.49 of 2012)


62.   Partnerships Act,2012 (No.16 of 2012)


63.   Petitions to the Parliament (Procedure) Act(No.22 of 2012)


64.   Prevention, Protection and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and Affected Communities


65.   Act,2012 (No.56 of 2012)


66.   Prevention of Terrorism Act(No30 of 2012)


67.   Public  Finance Management Act,2012 (18 of 2012)


68.   Public  Service  Commission Act(No.13 of 2012)


69.   Public  Service  Superannuation Scheme Act(No.8 of 2012)


70.   Publication of Electoral Opinion Polls Act (No.39 of 2012)


71.   Statute Law Miscellaneous Act(No.12 of 2012)


72.   Supplementary Appropriation Act(No.7 of 2012)


73.   Teachers Service  Commission Act(No.20 of 2012)


74.   Transition to Devolved Government Act(No.1 of 2012)


75.   Treaty  Making and Ratification Act(No.45 of 2012)


76.   Universities Act(No.42 of 2012)


77.   Land  Act(No.6 of20)


2013


78.   County Governments Public Finance Management Transition Act(No.8 of 2013)


79.   Kenya  Institute of Curriculum Development Act(No.4 of 2013)


80.   The National Commission of for UNESCO Act(No.5 of 2013)


81.   National Honours Act (No11 of 2013)


82.   National Government Co-ordination Act(No.1 of 2013)


83.   Office of the Director of Public  Prosecution Act(No.2 of 2013)


84.   Public  Health  Officers Act(No.12 of 2013)


85.   Supplementary Appropriation Act(No.3 of 2013)


86.   Transition County Allocation of Revenue Act(No.5 of 2013)


87.   Transition County Appropriation Act(No.6 of 2013)


88.   Agriculture, Fisheries and food  Authority Act(No.13 of 2013)


89.   Basic Education Act(No.14 of 2013)


90.   Civil Aviation Act(No.21 of 2013)


91.   Constituencies Development Fund  Act(No.30 of 2013)


92.   Crops Act(No.16 of 2013)


93.   Kenya  Agriculture and Livestock Research Act(No.17 of 2013)


94.   Kenya  Law Reform Commission Act(No.19 of 2013)


95.   Kenya  Medical Supplies Authority Act(No.20 of 2013)


96.   Nairobi  Centre for International Arbitration Act (No.26 of 2013)


97.   Public  Benefits Organizations Act(No.18 of 2013)


98.   Public  Private Partnerships Act(No.15 of 2013)


99.   Pyrethrum Act(No.22 of 2012)


100.Science,Technology and Innovation Act(No.28 of 2013)


101.Social Assistance Act(No.24 of 2013)


102.Sports Act(No.25 of 2013)


103.Statutory Instruments Act(No.23 of 2013)


104.Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act(No.29 of 2013)


105.Division of Revenue Act (No 31 of 2013)


106.Appropriation Act (No 33 of 2013)


107.County Allocation of Revenue Act (No 34 of 2013)


108.International Interests in Aircraft Equipment Act(No.27 of 2013)

AMENDMENT ACTS

2010


1. Commissions of Inquiry  (Amendment) Act,(No.5 of 2010)


2. Witness Protection (Amendment) Act,(No.2 of 2010)


3. Finance Act (No.10 of 2010)


2011


4. Capital Markets (Amendment) Act,(No.37 of 2011)


5. Central Depositories (Amendment) Act,(No.38 of 2011)


6. Industrial Training (Amendment) Act,(No.34 of 2011)


7. Nurses  (Amendment) Act,(No.27 of 2011)


8. Tea (Amendment) Act,(No.4 of 2011)


9. Traffic  (Amendment) Act,(No.3 of 2011)


10.   Vetting of Judges and Magistrates (Amendment) Act,(No.6 of 2011)


2012


11.   Capital Markets (Amendment) Act,(No.35 of 2012)


12.   Central Bank of Kenya  (Amendment) Act,(No.36 of 2012)


13.   Elections (Amendment) Act,(No.31 of 2012)


14.   Elections (Amendment) No.2  Act,(No.32 of 2012)


15.   Elections (Amendment) No.3  Act,(No.48 of 2012)


16.   Judicature (Amendment) Act,  (No.10A of 2012)


17.   Political  Parties (Amendment) Act,(No.50 of 2012)


18.   Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment)Act,(No.51 of 2012)


19.  Seed and Plant Varieties (Amendment) Act,2012 (No.53 of 2012)


20.   Statute Law Miscellaneous (Amendment)Act,(No.2 of 2012)


21.  Traffic  (Amendment) Act,(No.37 of 2012)


22.  Traffic  (Amendment) No.2  Act,(No.38 of 2012)


23. Truth, Justice  and Reconciliation (Amendment) Act,(No.44 of 2012)


24. Vetting of Judges and Magistrates (Amendment) Act,(No43 of 2012)


2013


25.   25.CustomsandExcise(Amendment)Act,(No.10 of2013)


26. 26.Presidential Retirement Benefits (Amendment) Act,(No.9 of 2013)

County Legislation
1. Vihiga County Appropriation Act (No. 1 of 2013)
 

 

ANNEX TWO
STATUS UPDATE ON
LITIGATION

Item


Particulars of Case / Application


CIC


Advocates Representing Cic


Nature of Complaint


Status


1.


Nbi. H.C.  Petition
No. 454  of 2012  The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution –vs- Par- liament of the Republic of Kenya  and Another


Petitioner


M/s. NjorogeRegeru & Co.  Advocates


Constitutional Petition challenging the constitu- tionality  of procedures and mechanisms provided for in the Leadership and Integrity Act,  2012  to ensure effective administration of Chapter 6 of the Constitution. The Petitioner argued that the
1st Respondent diluted and watered down the Bill prepared by CIC  in consultation with  stake- holders during the enactment process, as a result of which the final product failed  to meet  the constitutional threshold as contemplated by Ar- ticle 80. Further, the Act as enacted undermines the mandate of the EACC in as far as it failed  to provide procedures and mechanisms for it to use in the enforcement of the Act.


Judgment delivered on 7/2/2013. Petition dismissed. The Court held that Part IV of the Act provides proce- dures  and mechanisms for enforcement of the General Leadership and Integrity Code and by extension the principles set out in Chapter Six. These  mechanisms are to be supplemented by rules and regulations enacted by the EACC. Part V of the Act provides criminal and civil penalties for infraction of the provisions of the Act.  Apart  from  these,  reference to the Public  Officer Ethics Act,  includes disciplinary action  to an officer who contravenes not only the General Code on Leadership and Integrity but also the Code of Conduct and Ethics of the relevant public  entity.  Whether to have a “one stop-shop” or have various  public  entities  involved  in the implementation of Chapter Six under the umbrella of EACC is a matter for the legislative  policy.

 

2.


Nbi. H.C.  Petition
No. 145  of 2012  The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution –vs- The Hon.  Attorney General and Another


Petitioner


M/s NjorogeRegeru& Co.  Advocates


The issue raised  was whether following the decision to segregate the Public  Financial Management Bill and present part of it as two separate Bills namely, the Contingencies Fund and County Emergency Funds  Bill, 2011  and the National Government Loans  Guarantee Bill, 2011
Respondents disregarded the procedure expressly stipulated under Article  261(4) and the provisions of Section 14(1)  to the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution that at least a 30 day period be allowed for the CIC  to consider the Bills before their enactment.


Judgment delivered on 18/1/2013. Petition dismissed. The Court held that CIC  had an opportunity to consider the content of subject Bills prior  to their publication.
The Public  Financial  Management Bill had been  forwarded to the CIC  by the letter  dated  15th  June,  2011 from  the office of the Deputy Prime  Minister. At the time the decision to sever the Bills was made  in August, 2011, CIC  had been  in possession of the merged Bill for two months.
The Court took  judicial  notice  of the fact that the subject statutes had been  repealed by Section 208  of the Public  Finance Management Act,  No. 18 of 2012  which was assented to on 24th  July, 2012  and its provisions, save for those  touching on county government came into operation on 27th  August, 2012. The petition therefore, and prayers  sought therein, were  superfluous or had been  overtaken by events.


3.


Nrb. H.C.  Petition No.
515 of 2012 Ali War- ioGuyo –vs- The Hon. Attorney General & 3
Others


4th Re- spondent


M/s. ChiuriKirui&Rugo
Advocates


The Petitioner filed a petition seeking to chal- lenge  of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Civil Appeal No. 74 & 82 of 2012  on the grounds that the Petitioner’s right  to vote and participate in a democratic free,  regular and fair elections will be violated  if the general elections are con- ducted on the 4th of March 2013.
The Petitioner argued that the country was not ready  to hold  general elections on 4th March 2013  as ordered by the Court of Appeal and that in the event  that the elections are held,  they will likely be irregular and infringe upon the rights  of the Petitioner and the citizens  of Kenya  because proper mechanisms for free and fair elections are yet to be achieved in order  to ensure credible, free and fair elections.


Judgment delivered on 1/3/2013. Petition dismissed. The Court held that the Petitioner failed  to meet  the required threshold in proving violation of one’s  consti- tutional rights.  Justice  Lenaola observed that IEBC had demonstrated its preparedness for the 4th March, 2013 General Elections and there  was no material evidence to demonstrate that the whole  preparation process was not ‘rushed’ thus resulting into malpractices and denial of the Petitioner’s right  to fair administrative action.


4.


Civil Appeal No. 351  of
2012  The Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution -vs- The Attorney General and Another


Appel- lant


M/s. Kilonzo& Compa- ny Advocates


This is an appeal  filed by the Appellant the Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution, against  the judgment of the High Court (Majanja, J.) delivered on 15th  November, 2012  by which the learned Judge  dismissed Petition No. 389  of 2012  filed by CIC,  against  the Attorney General and the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission. The dispute before the High  Court related to the constitutionality of Section 34(9)  of the Elections Act.
At the hearing of the appeal, the Appellants argued that in interpreting “special  interests” as used  in, inter alia, Article  97 (1) (c) of the Constitution, the High  Court should have applied the interpretational principle of ejusdem generis so that to qualify  for inclusion, any additional or special  interest needed to have a rational connec- tion with  youth, persons with  disabilities  and workers or else it would not fit in and Presiden- tial and Deputy presidential candidates certainly did not belong  in the categories of special  inter- ests or vulnerabilities listed in the Constitution.


Judgment delivered 14/6/2013. The Court held that
the superior court  misdirected itself in its interpretation of ‘special  interests’ and declared section 34(9)  of the Elections Act void as it is in contravention with  Articles
97(1)(c), 98(1)(b)(c)(d),100 and 177(a)(b) and (c) of the Constitution.
The Court of Appeal stated  as follows:
“In the spirit of harmonization, and having  considered the scheme  of representation that runs through the Articles  that deal with  the Senate and those  that deal with  the County Assemblies, we have no doubt that
the next category of members of the National Assembly under Article  97 (1)(c) must  logically  be the marginal- ized groups.
We agree  that special  interests is not defined in the Constitution but from  what  we have said regarding the corresponding provisions for the other  legislative assemblies, they must  bear  the same  meaning as marginalized groups. Moreover, this accords with  our own  understanding that the rationale for special  seats
is to open  up political  space  for the entry  and participa- tion of persons, groups and categories of people who, due to various  disadvantages and vulnerabilities, have historically been  unable or incapable of generally and effectively finding their way through a strictly competi- tive methodology and have thus been  relegated to the peripheries of the political  playground.”


5.


Supreme Court Advi- sory Opinion Applica- tion No. 2 of 2012,
In the Matter of the Principle of Gender Representation in the National Assembly and the Senate


Interest- ed Party


M/s. Rachier&Amollo
Advocates


 


11/12/2012.The Supreme Court was of the view that the realisation of the rights  under Article  27 (6) and (8) could  only be fully realised  using  legislative  as well as other  measures but over a spaced period of time  and by means  of positive  and good-faith exercise  of gov- ernance discretion. That  the realization of these  rights cannot merely  be attained by legislation but by policy and other  measures. The court  ruled  that Article  81(b) bears  a broad  principle and not a right.  It is a statement of aspiration: that wherever and whenever elections are held,  the Kenyan people expect  to see mixed gender.  The Chapter in which Article  81 appears bears the title “representation of the people”. Moreover, it concerns elective  public  bodies. In the Court’s opinion, public  elective  bodies is not confined to just the Nation- al Assembly, Senate or County Government but to any public  body  in Kenya  that holds  some  form  of elections in its representation. Therefore, in its conclusion, Article 81 (b) cannot be attained immediately. The same  can- not be applicable to the March 2013  General elections.
The court  unanimously ruled  that,  there  is a lacuna  in the Constitution regarding the settlement of disputes relating to the elections of the President after  the first round of elections. Before legislative  provisions to cover this lacuna  are enacted, the Court held that it is its duty to provide a solution. The election of the President is a process. Article  140(1) of the Constitution provides for settlement of disputes only after  there  is a Presi- dent-elect and not within  the process leading to the attainment of a President-elect.
The Court noted that the framers of the Constitution could  not have intended that the Supreme Court only handles matters arising  after  the administrative pro- nouncement of the final results  of an election yielding a President-elect. The Court posed the question whether it would be tenable to hold  the second round of elec- tions  within  30 days after  the first round of elections? The court  in applying a purposive approach held that 30 days, in this instance, should be taken  to mean  30 days after  all the disputes regarding the first round of presidential elections have been  settled. The court therefore held that it has jurisdiction to hear  disputes relating to the first round of Presidential elections under the Constitution.


6.


H.C  Petition No. 71 of
2013  The Institute for Social Accountability (TISA) -vs- The Hon. Attorney General and Another


Interest- ed Party


M/s. Nderitu& Partners
Advocates


Constitutional petition challenging the consti- tutionality of the decision of the Minister for Finance to release  the sum of Kshs.  10.1  Billion to the Constituencies Development Fund  (CDF) Management Board  for disbursement to constit-
uencies under the auspices of the Constituencies Development Fund  at a time  when Parliament was facing  dissolution by operation of law and local authorities were  facing  imminent dissolu- tion.


The Petition came  up for directions on Thursday 27th June  2013, before the Hon.  Justices  Lenaola, Ngugi  and Majanja  and was set for hearing on 25/07/ 2013.


7.


Supreme Court Adviso- ry Opinion Application No. 2 of 2013, In the Matter of the Division of Revenue Bill, 2013


Interest- ed Party


M/s. Nderitu& Partners
Advocates


The Senate filed an application in the Supreme Court seeking an Advisory Opinion on the consti- tutionality of the National Assembly’s decision to ignore its amendment to the Division  of Revenue Bill which was enactment and signed into law by the President on 11th  June  2013.


The matter was set for hearing on 20th  August, 2013

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ANNEX THREE
MEMBERS OF  THE COMMISSION
Mr. Charles Nyachae
Chairperson
 
Dr. Elizabeth Muli
Vice-Chairperson. Convener of the Executive and  Security Thematic Team
 
Dr. Imaana Kibaaya Laibuta Convener  of the Judiciary and Constitutional  Commissions Thematic Team
Prof. Peter Wanyande Convener  of the Devolved Government  Thematic Team
Mr. Kamotho Waiganjo Convener  of the Public Finance Thematic Team
Ms. Catherine  M. Mumma Convener  of the Bill of Rights and  Citizenship  Thematic Team
Dr. Ibrahim M. Ali Convener  of the Land  and Environment Thematic Team
Mr. Philemon  Mwaisaka, EBS, SS Convener  of the Public  Service and Leadership Thematic Team
Dr. Florence Omosa Convener  of the Representation of the People & the Legislature Team
 
ANNEX FOUR
KEY SECRETARIAT
PERSONNEL
A.g. Secretary / Chief Executive Officer and Director of Programmes
 
1.     Mrs. Esther  Kodhek
 
Administration
 
1.     Lily Koros, Director, Management Services
2.     Kennedy Malinda, Supply Chain Management
3.     Khalid  Salim,  Head  of Communications
4.     Margaret  Akutekha, Internal Audit   Manager
5.     Bernard Cherutich, Senior  Accounts Officer and Head  of Accounts
6.     Felix Oganga, Senior  Finance Officer and Head  of Finance
7.     Fredrick Oromo, Senior  Supply Chain Management Officer
8.     Catherine Muia,  Records and Documentation Officer
9.     Lauraine Anyango, ICT Officer
10.   Monicah Wambua, Human Resource Officer
11.   Phillip Abishai, ICT Officer
12.   Patrick  Lumumba Musonye, Supply Chain Management Officer
13.   Lechuta Vashti  Nadayat, Hansard Officer
14.   James  Mburu, Legal Clerk
15.   James  Kamucha, Head  of Transport
16.   Janeth  Maiyo
17.   Ann  Wandia Njoroge, Executive Assistant I
18.   Rose Boit, Executive Assistant II
19.   Nina Kabayo, Executive Assistant II
20.   Pamela  Mugei, Executive Assistant II
21.   Rebecca Akoth, Executive Assistant II
22.   Hassan  Abdi,  Accountant II
23.   Pauline  Kamurutu, Accountant II
24.   Ziporah Kiguta, Records Officer
25.   Haron Papa Osukuku, Clerical Officer
26.   Dorothy Mogiri, Clerical Officer
27.   Edward Orot  Omer, Driver
28.   Benson Wetindi Etabale, Driver
29.   Daniel  Ngetich, Driver
30.   Mustafa Khainga, Driver
31.   Isaac Anampiu Mugambi, Driver
32.   Bryson  Mwakio, Driver
33.   Joseph Kariuki, Driver
34.   Fredrick Kisuli Kyalo,  Driver
35.   Peter Maina  Kariuki, Driver
36.   Godwin Radiro, Driver
37.   Mary  Ndunge Munyao, Office Assistant
38.   Betty Awuor, Office Assistant
39.   Joyce  Kadenge, Office Assistant
40.   Pamela  Aloyo, Office Assistant
 
Temporary Staff
 
1.     Judy Kirior,  Human Resource Officer
2.     Wilson Mukuha, Supply Chain Management Officer
3.     Kelvin  Letuya, Accounts Clerk
4.     Tabitha Wairimu Mburu, Receptionist
 
Programmes
 
1.     Esther  Kodhek, Director of Programmes
2.     Mugita Gesongo, Head  of Monitoring and Evaluation
3.     Elizabeth K. Obiero, Principal Programme Officer, Organisational Development & Institutional Strengthening
4.     James  Wagalla, Principal Programme Officer, Organisational Development & Institutional Strengthening
5.     Doreen Muthaura, Principal Programme Officer, Legislative Drafting
6.     Ruth  Muthui, Senior  Programmes Officer
7.     Valerie  Nangidi, Senior  Programmes Officer
8.     Sophia Sitati, Senior  Programmes Officer
9.     Victor  Odhiambo, Senior  Programmes Officer
10.   Abdirazak Abdi,  Senior  Programmes Officer
11.   Christine Njeru,  Senior  Programmes Officer
12.   Mary  Goretti Orwa, Senior  Programmes Officer
13.   Edith  Cheramboss, Senior  Programmes Officer
14.   Timothy Kariuki, Senior  Programmes Officer
15.   Jeremiah Nyakundi, Senior  Programmes Officer
16.   Caroline Gaita,   Senior  Program Officer
17.   Kephas Okach, Snr.  Programme Officer, M&E
 
Interns
 
1.     Victor  Odanga, Devolved Government Thematic Area
2.     Muna  Ibrahim, Devolved Government Thematic Area
3.     Robert Mabwa, Human Rights  and Citizenship Thematic Area
4.     Jackline  Muthoni, The Judiciary and Constitutional Commissions Thematic Area
5.     Tim Muiruri, Representation of the People  & the Legislature
 
ANNEX FIVE
DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS
CIC  acknowledges and  appreciates the  material, technical and  financial support received from the following development partners:
1.   Government of Japan
2.   The Royal Netherlands Government
3.   International Development Law Organisation
4.   International Rescue Committee
5.   Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
6.   United Nations Development Programme
7.   United Nations High  Commission for Refugees
8.   United States  Agency for International Development
9.   World Wide  Fund  for Nature
10. State  University of New York, Kenya
11. United Kingdom, Department for International Development
‘‘A united, peaceful and prosperous Kenya in which all citizens including leaders respect the rule of law, uphold national values and live by the Constitution.’’
Commission for the Implementation of the Constitution
Utekelezaji  wa  katiba,  jukumu  la  wote
(PTG/0866442/13-14)
Lot No.
Ship's Name And Date
Marks and Numbers.
Consignee Name And Address
Location And Description Of Goods
0107/CCF/14
Delmas Keta/
2-Mar-12
1X20 ECMU1672898
Rural Heart Kpo Box 761152nairobi Kenya
Compact Cfs- Holy Quran 500 Pcs 5 Boxes X100 Pcs Holy Quran 380 Pcs 5 Boxes X76 Pcs Prayers Posters 1000 Pcs 2 Cartons X 500 Pcs School Table 20 Pcs Filing Cabinets 8 Pcs Executive Chairs 1 Pc Clothings For Muslim Ladies Children Abaya Hejab
0108/CCF/14
Alina Rickmers/ 
6-Nov-13
1X20
CAIU3247700
Ribiero Productline Ltdp O Box No 98196-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 27 Carton Boxes Legend Brand Indian Mouth Freshener
0109/CCF/14
N Dependant/ 
17- Nov-13
1X40 MRKU2635283
Afi For Trading And Investment Co Ltd Juba South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Biscuits
0110/CCF/14
N Dependant/ 
17-Nov-13
1X40 MSKU8097865
Afi For Trading And Investment Co Ltd Juba South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Biscuits
0111/CCF/14
Csl Ride/
25-Nov-13
1X40
TTNU4638780
East Africa Partnership Limited
Compact Cfs- Humanitarian Donated Relief Cargo
0112/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 FSCU3799158
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0113/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 CRXU1213550
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0114/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/
28-Nov-13
1X20 CRXU1722602
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0115/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/
28-Nov-13
1X20 CRXU1732998
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0116/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 FSCU3179141
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0117/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 FSCU3521568
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0118/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 FSCU3556815
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0119/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 FSCU3653610
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0120/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 CRXU1517315
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0121/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 CRXU1546442
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0122/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 CRXU1775618
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0123/CCF/14
Hammonium Gallicum/ 
28-Nov-13
1X20 CRXU1286237
Greater Pioneer Operating Companyltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Blockno 2 C Vii City Centre Jubarepublic Of South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Silicate Ii Sodium Silicate
0124/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU5819007
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0125/CCF/14
Kerstin S/
2-Dec-13
1X20 GESU1439332
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0126/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MRKU7656041
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0127/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MRKU8139721
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0128/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MRKU8655590
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0129/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MRKU8856595
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0130/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MRKU9123524
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0131/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU2489555
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0132/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU2833043
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0133/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU2952504
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0134/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU3005721
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0135/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU3501573
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0136/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU3515793
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0137/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU4180879
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0138/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU5672153
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0139/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MAEU6798282
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0140/CCF/14
Kerstin S/
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU7051999
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0141/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU7484495
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0142/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU7485465
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0143/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU7576863
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0144/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 PONU0127114
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0145/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 PONU0192296
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0146/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 PONU0316490
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0147/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 SEAU2331573
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0148/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 TCKU2852558
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0149/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 TGHU2328629
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0150/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
2-Dec-13
1X20 MRKU6683839
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0151/CCF/14
Kerstin S/
2-Dec-13
1X20 PONU0336080
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd Gpoc Complex Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii City Centre Juba Republic Of South
Compact Cfs- 504 Jumbo Bags Of Oil Well G Class Cement
0152/CCF/14
Tasanee/ 
29-Nov-13
1X20 BAXU3404040
Afro Asia Trading Company
Compact Cfs- Spaghetti And Pasta
0153/CCF/14
Tasanee/ 
29-Nov-13
1X40 BAXU5027497
Afro Asia Trading Company
Compact Cfs- Spaghetti And Pasta
0154/CCF/14
JummeTraders/ 
9-Dec-13
1X20 MSKU2124310
Tembo Trade Limited Hai Atalabara Opp Antipas Pharmacy Juba
Compact Cfs- 1450 Packages Of Efes Beverages
0155/CCF/14
Nicole/ 
23-Dec-13
1X20 MOAU6505235
Toto Company Limited
Compact Cfs- Diesel Tanker On Trailer And Accessories - Non Hazardous Diesel Generator On Trailer And Accessories - Non Hazardous
0156/CCF/14
Nicole/ 
23-Dec-13
1X20 MOAU6526069
Toto Company Limited
Compact Cfs- Diesel Tanker On Trailer And Accessories - Non Hazardous Diesel Generator On Trailer And Accessories - Non Hazardous
0157/CCF/14
Kerstin S/
30-Dec-13
1X20 MRKU9431152
Russel Pharma Ltd Plot No 15 Kator West Tombura Road -Juba South Sudan
Compact Cfs- 462 Cartons Four Hundred Sixty Two Cartons Only Imazole Micozole Fricks Cough Syrup Chloramphenicol 1 Ophthalmic Ointment Usp Tetracycline 1 Gvzole Cream Promotional P-Alaxin Lonart Ds Agycin-250 Tablets Santriax-1000
0158/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
30-Dec-13
1X40 MRKU4536084
Russel Pharma Ltd Plot No 15 Kator West Tombura Road -Juba South Sudan
Compact Cfs- 1505 Cartons One Thousand Five Hundred Five Cartons O Nly Alvite Syrup Bilor Syrup Byofer 12 Syrup Carben Suspension I Mazole Micozole Catoril Tablets Getacin Eye Drops Zinvite Syrup Comit-50 Tablets Gacet 650 Effervescent Tablets Chloramphenicol 1 Ophthalmic Ointment Usp Tetracycline 1 Mioxin -125 Softness Bliss S Sulfur Ointment Gvither Forte Injection Fricks Cough Syrup Gvith Er 40 Injection Heal Soft Fricks Ginger Lozenge Fricks Menthol Loze Nge Fricks Orange Lozenge Lofnac Balm
0159/CCF/14
N Dependant/ 
4-Jan-14
1X40 MSKU0166229
Reef International Konyo Konyo Market Juba
Compact Cfs- Used Clothing
0160/CCF/14
Jemima/ 
10-Jan-14
1X40 TCLU7051332
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Jointly And
Compact Cfs- 3 Boxes Of Oilwell Supplie S Dimension Per Kg 1 3 - 248x150x271 Cm 2 3 - 220x 200x240 Cm 3 3 - 260x200x2 65 Cm
0161/CCF/14
Hammonia Pacificum/  13-Jan-14
1X40 POCU1197766
Greater Pioneer Operating Co Gpoctower Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii Juba Town Juba South Sudan
Compact Cfs- 20 X Ibc S Of Corrtrea T 4700 Corrosion Inhibitor Po 1311024 Hs Code 382490
0162/CCF/14
HugoSchulte/ 
17-Jan-14
1X20 MRKU7119356
Greater Pioneer Operating Co Gpoc Tower Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii Juba Town Juba South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Functional Chemicals Hs-Code 320890 Un 3082 Environmentally Hazardous Substance Liquid N O S Solvent Naphtha 9 Iii 63 00 C C C Marine Pollutant
0163/CCF/14
HugoSchulte/ 
17-Jan-14
1X20 MRKU7383100
Greater Pioneer Operating Co Gpoc Tower Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii Juba Town Juba South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Functional Chemicals Hs-Code 320890 Un 3082 Environmentally Hazardous Substance Liquid N O S Solvent Naphtha 9 Iii 63 00 C C C Marine Pollutant
0164/CCF/14
HugoSchulte/ 
17-Jan-14
1X20 MRKU7556839
Greater Pioneer Operating Co Gpoc Tower Plot No 2 Block No 2 C Vii Juba Town Juba South Sudan
Compact Cfs- Functional Chemicals Hs-Code 320890 Un 3082 Environmentally Hazardous Substance Liquid N O S Solvent Naphtha 9 Iii 63 00 C C C Marine Pollutant
0165/CCF/14
CslRide/ 
20-Jan-14
1X40 MEDU4010798
To The Order Of Chase Bank Kenya Limited /Kenya Railways Corporation
Compact Cfs- Locomotive Engine Parts As Per Proforma Invoice No Ge06072013a Dated 05 07 2013 Cif Mombasa Kenya Idf No E1307110142 On Board Msc Maeva Fg347r Nov 24 2013 New York Port In U S A Letter Of Credit No 008silc132000002
0166/CCF/14
CslRide/ 
20-Jan-14
1X20 TOLU3209125
Greater Pioneer Operating Company Ltd
Compact Cfs- Forklift Truck
0167/CCF/14
Kerstin S/ 
21-Jan-14
1X20 MRKU8957158
632 Package S Gr Oss Weight 14225 300 Kgs Measurement 25 000 Cbm 632 Packages Assor Ted Baking Ingredients As Per ProformaInvoice No 11926724 Dated 07  Kcb Bank Ltd On Behalf Of First Community Bank Ltd A Cbake Easy Products E A Limited
Compact Cfs- 632 Package S Gr Oss Weight 14225 300 Kgs Measurement 25 000 Cbm 632 Packages Assor Ted Baking Ingredients As Per Proforma Invoice No 11926724 Dated 07 06 2013 Cfr Mombasa Port Kenya Idf No E1307119322 First Comm Unity Bank Lc Number Olcde130011012c Kcb Bank Lc Ref Tf1321200003 Marks And Numbers Hs-Codes 20088050 19012000 21069098 19041 010 Intransit To Compact Cfs
0168/CCF/14
Stadt Sevilla/ 
15-Feb-14
1X40 GSTU9468019
Mr Peter Tingwa
Compact Cfs- Vehicle 1993 Gmc Sierra K1500 1gtek14z9pe527966 2100 Kgs One Lot Of Personal Effects
0169/CCF/14
Buxcontact/ 
20-Feb-14
1X40 MSKU9667730
Jamilow Ali Plan South Sudan P Obox 182 Juba Sudan Tel 00 21 1956201600
Compact Cfs- 1 Mercedes 190e Auto Reg A24 Xmd Vin 2010242a046016 1 Bmw 328i C Abrio Auto Reg R1 Oms Vin Wbabk82040et83634 1 Ldv 400 Convoy D Lw B Reg Ao51 Efm Vin Seyzmnfhedn076289 1 Lot Of Used Clothes Shoe S Used Petrol Chainsaw - Drained
0170/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU8479700                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0171/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU5206345                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0172/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU5935157                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0173/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 CAXU6333281                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0174/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU6516343                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0175/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU6561131                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0176/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU6769125                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0177/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU7005306                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0178/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU7040544                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0179/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU7077688                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0180/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU7238400                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0181/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU7285640                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0182/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU7332551                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0183/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU7653870                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0184/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU7769222                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0185/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU8338533                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0186/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU8886521                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0187/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU9258387                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0188/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU2673433                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0189/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU2700312                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0190/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU2723956                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0191/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3008994                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0192/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3074471                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0193/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3102784                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0194/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3336761                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0195/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3473131                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0196/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3486756                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0197/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3489014                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0198/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3754967                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0199/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3872390                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0200/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/  13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU5871622                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0201/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU5875675                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0202/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU5904351                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0203/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU5933637                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0204/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU7189988                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0205/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU7212630                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0206/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU7249984                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0207/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU7572868                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0208/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU7851040                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0209/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU7851190                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0210/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 PONU0130910                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0211/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 PONU0144683                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0212/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 PONU0224264                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0213/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/
13-Mar-14
1X20 PONU0338328                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0214/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 TCLU2504734                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0215/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 TGHU2579780                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0216/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU3914160                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0217/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU4228020                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0218/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MSKU5460853                                                                                        
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0219/CCF/14
Hermes Arrows/ 
13-Mar-14
1X20 MRKU6640251                                                                                         
Eael Logistics Kenya Limited Inchcape House 3rd Flr Archbishop Markarios Cls Off Moi Avenue P O Box1846-80100 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- 15 Broken White Rice Packed In Pp 50 Kg With Pe Insertion Vietnam Export Standard Total 25 000 Bags Total Nw 1 250 00 Mts Total Tare 3 75 Mts Total Gw 1 253 75 Mts
0220/CCF/14
Buxcontact/
17-Mar-14
1X40 MRKU4502850
Luate Joseph Juba South Sudan Tel211 955272347 Juba 256 782978765 Mombasa
Compact Cfs- Clothing Items In Transit To Juba South Sudan
Note: Spirit/Ethanol shall only be sold to Excise Licensed Manufacturers. Sugar shall only be sold to those with valid Kenya Sugar Board Permits. Scrap metal shall only be sold to Registered Scrap Metal Dealers.
Dated the 25th August, 2014.
KENNETH OCHOLA,
Chief Manager, Port Operations

