
				Page: 2335GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 5821
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED PETROL SERVICE STATION ON PLOT NO. KILIFI/CHASIMBA/449, CHASIMBA, KILIFI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Samwel Nyalle) proposes to construct a service station in Chasimba area, Kilifi County. The project will consist of the following: Structural steel canopy, concrete driveway to provide access into and from the service station, underground storage tank measuring 1500 x 1000 mm, 4 No. of fuel-dispensing pumps, 5 No. of toilet-rooms, a tire pressure device, a store, septic tank and soak pit.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measure:

Impact


Proposed mitigation measures


Water and soil contamination


Safety and emergence response plan to be developed with emphasis on protection of environment.
No uncontrolled discharges.


Increased fire and safety risks


Place fire extinguisher at conspicuous sites.
All emergency fire exists to be clearly marked.
Ensure safety warnings are conspicuously displayed (No. smoking, inflammable substances etc.).
Provide and enforce the use of personal protective equipment.
Ensure that operational and adequate fire extinguishers are on site.
Install fire alarms.
Maintain an accident register at the premises.


Safety and obstruction


Movement of construction vehicles and timed to operate during off-peak hours.
Observe and comply with traffic regulations and other by-laws.
Contracts to peak and implement a traffic management plan.
Provision of the necessary road signs and caution.


Air and noise pollution


Notify resident prior to project commencement.
The workers shall be trained on the management of air pollution from vehicles and machines.
Machines and vehicles to be serviced and maintained as per the manufacturers specifications.
Vehicles delivering soil materials shall be covered to reduce dust.
Dust generating activities (excavations) will not be carried out during times of strong winds.
Frequent watering of the site to reduce dust.
Stand by generator rooms to re-enforced with sound proof materials.


Public health deterioration


Develop a site health and safety plan, detailing, safety procedures, restricted sites.
A sign personal responsible for safety standards and precautions.
Provision of safety protective equipment.
Qualified personnel to supervise and enforce safety standards.
Recording of all incidences in the accident registrar and action taken.
Near-miss risks and accidents to be reported to avoid eminent problems.
The contractor and proponent shall take an active role in HIV/AIDS sensitization of the workers and the community.


Production of waste


Comply with the requirements of the environment.
Management (Waste Management) Regulations.
Develop a solid waste management plan prior to project commencing, identifying optimal waste re-use options and disposal areas.
Minimize waste production by utilizing best available techniques to site preparation.
Clearly designate and construct an appropriate waste collection facility or provide covered refuse skips.
Re-use construction waste to the maximum extent possible.
Proper handling and storage procures for hazardous waste e.g. fuel oil should be stored in areas with hard standing and containment to handle spills.


Energy utilization


Develop an energy management plan.
Construction machinery and vehicles should be maintained and used in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications, to maximize efficiency and lower use of energy.
Construction workers should be sensitized on the importance of energy management.
Install energy saving devices.
Institute alternative sources of energy e.g. solar panels.


Water utilization


Monitor water consumption and utilization.
Sensitize construction workers on the importance of proper water management.
Develop alternative sources e.g. rain water harvesting.


Leakage of tanks and products line


Insurance against the consequences of a spill contaminating groundwater or soil.
Monitor daily reconciliation of wet stock and inventory records.
Incase of suspect losses, institute tank and line integrity testing; and
Conduct a soil gas survey to check the extent of contamination from the leaks.


Waste water and waste oil management practices


Carefully collect used oil in drums and dispose of by licensed refuse contractor.
Adhere to Wastewater Management Regulation of the Legal Notice No. 121 and water Quality Regulations of Legal Notice No. 120.
Conduct wastewater monitoring to check compliance on monthly basis and submit the results to NEMA District Office for immediate approval of the station operations.
Document and train staff in the emergency spill response plan.


Solid waster generation and disposal (littering, soil and surface water pollution)


Comply with the requirements of Environmental Management (Waste Management) Regulations) Legal Notice No. 120.
Prepare a waste management plan.
Stop deposition of waste in open pits.
Clearly designate and construct and appropriate waste collection facility or provide covered refuse skips.
Segregate waste at source.
Monitor waste volumes.
Identify licensed waste disposal contractor to remove from site and monitor performance.
Carefully collect used oil in drums and dispose of by licensed refuse contractor.


Fire and accident


Provision and placement of appropriate fire extinguishers and training of personnel to handle emergency situations.
Provision of fully equipped First Aid Kit box on the site at all times.
Display warning signs at suitable locations.
Prohibit unauthorized persons at the station.
Weather proof fittings for all lighting and power points located outside the fuel station.


Air pollution


Ensure that the generators are maintained to manufactures specification, records maintained and availed whenever there is need.
Ensure that tank vents are located away from sensitive receptors.
Conduct solvent vapour monitoring.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kilifi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
ZEPHANIA O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5678551         National Environment Management Authority.

