
				Page: 154GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  369
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE JUDICIAL SERVICE ACT
(No. 1 of 2011)
THE CHILDREN ACT
(No. 8 of 2001)
NCAJ TASKFORCE ON CHILDREN MATTERS
APPOINTMENT
PURSUANT to the resolution of the National Council on the Administration of Justice (NCAJ) at its 15th meeting to have established a taskforce to address emerging challenges facing children in the justice sector; and in line with the provisions of the Constitution, sections 5 and 34 of the Judicial Service Act, and section 22 (3) of the Children Act, I, the Chief Justice of the Republic of Kenya, and Chairperson of the National Council on the Administration of Justice, appoint the NCAJ Taskforce on Children Matters with effect from 10th December, 2015.
The Taskforce terms of reference:
To review and report on the status of children in the administration of justice.
Examine the operative policy and legal regimes as well as the emerging case law to identify the challenges and make appropriate recommendations.
Assess, review, report and recommend on the service standards of each of the justice sector institutions with respect to children matters.
Prepare draft rules of procedure for enforcement of fundamental rights of children.
Conduct a situation analysis of the existing infrastructure and equipment in the criminal justice system in regard to children mattersand develop guidelines for the monitoring, supervision and inspections for holding facilities.
Develop Guidelines for Child Protection Units and propose mechanisms for the establishment of Child Police Unit in the National Police Service.
Develop the Court Practice Directions on Children cases.
Develop the Diversion Regulations.
Develop a Policy on Mandatory Continuous Professional Development program on child rights for justice and examine and review the training curricula on children.
10. Develop policies on re-integration of children accompanying imprisoned mothers.
11. Develop policies on separated cells for children (include guidelines/minimum standards of infrastructure of children facilities).
12. Development of the guidelines for children with special needs.
13. Develop guidelines for inclusion of children with special needs in the Juvenile Justice Actors procedure to be included in the Practice guidelines.
14. Develop a coordinated sensitization and awareness strategy.
15. Develop a form for presenting the P&C cases in court (to be included in the court practice directions).
16. Improve co-ordination of the Juvenile Justice Actors at the National and County level.
Composition of the Taskforce:
The Taskforce shall comprise the following members:
Lady Justice Martha Koome—Judiciary—(Chairperson)
Stanley K. Cheruiyot—National Police Service—(Vice-Chairperson).
Josephine Oguye (Ms.)—Department of Children Services (Secretary).
Mary  Inyuma Wang’ele (Ms.)—Office of the Director of Public Prosecution.
Carolyne Atieno (Ms.)—Department of Probation and Aftercare Services.
Josephine Sinyo (Ms.)—Kenya Law Reform Commission.
Dennis Kiio—Legal Resources Foundation Trust.
Teresa Omondi-Adeitan (Ms.)—Federation of Women Lawyers,  Kenya.
Anthony Mwicigi—Judiciary.
Lucy Gitari—Judiciary.
Edna Nyaloti Ameyo (Ms.)—Witness Protection Agency.
Grace Ndirangu (Ms.)—Directorate of Criminal Investigation.
Veronica Wambui Mwangi (Ms.)—Kenya National Commission on Human Rights.
Marysheila Onyango-Oduor (Ms.)—Law Society of Kenya.
Florence Kerubo Omundi (Ms.)—Prisons Department.
Ruth Juliet N. Gachanja (Ms.)—The Cradle.
Duncan Okello—NCAJ.
Facilitators:
Manuela Kinyanjui—ODCJ.
Martha K. Mueni (Ms.)—OCJ .
Dated the 20th January, 2016.
WILLY MUTUNGA,
Chief Justice and Chair,
National Council on the Administration of Justice (NCAJ).

