
				Page: 157GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  386
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
Committee to Investigate Alleged Acts Of Gross Misconduct Of Five (5) County Government Of Kitui Public Officers
APPOINTMENT
Pursuant to Article 10, Article 47 (1), Chapter Six (6) Articles 75 (1) (2) and (3); and Article 232 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010; the County Governments Act, 2012, section 30 (2) (l) and section 40 (a–f); and sections K.5 and K.6 of the Human Resource Policies and Procedures Manual, April, 2015, the Governor, Kitui County appoints a Committee to investigate alleged acts of gross misconduct by five (5) County Government of Kitui public officers consisting of the following:
Members of the Committee:
Mwongela Munyoki (Dr.)—(Chairman)
Teresia Muthui—(Vice Chairperson)
Members:
Joel Kinyua Kathumbi
Kimanzi Musili
Mwende Mutuvi
Peter Mbuuko
James P. Mbandi (Dr.)
Agnes Kambua
David Kisengese Mbebe
Julius Mutemi Mwangangi
Pastor Fredrick Kiema
Joint Secretaries:
Hellen Mutuku
Tom Ojwang
Kanini Musyoka
Mandate
The mandate of the Committee is to investigate alleged acts of gross misconduct by the following five (5) County Government of Kitui public officers who have been interdicted to facilitate investigations:
Eng. Paul Christopher Kimali Kioko—County Executive Committee Member, Lands, Infrastructure and Urban Development.
Stanslous Musyoka Nyamai—County Secretary.
Grace Kavinya Muimi—Chief Officer, Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning.
Emma Kamene Kitemange—Chief Officer, Ministry of Youth, Culture, Sports, Gender and Social Services.
Evans Mumo Mwangangi (Dr.)—Deputy Director/Ag. Chief Officer, Ministry of Health and Sanitation (at the time, assigned to perform duties of Chief Officer).
The Terms of Reference (TOR) of the Committee are to:
(a) Study various documents including legislation, policies ,rules, regulations, interdiction letters, correspondence from lawyers, instructions to County Government of Kitui lawyers, among others that may assist the team in its investigations;
(b) Study and categorize as appropriate the alleged acts of gross misconduct against each officer and issues for investigation;
(c)  Receive, study and analyze information relating to alleged acts of misconduct against each officer;
(d) Visit sites and other facilities connected and/or that have relevance to the alleged acts of gross misconduct;
(e)  Visit and interview Land Registry staff and other staff who may have relevant information on alleged acts of gross misconduct;
(f)   Interview relevant public officers, contractors, suppliers and members of the public who may have information on the alleged acts of gross misconduct;
(g) Collect and clearly record all relevant material facts pertaining to the alleged acts of gross misconduct;
(h) Investigate and establish whether the alleged acts of gross misconduct for each of the five public officers have been proven or not giving reasons thereof; and
(i)   Prepare a well written report with clear findings backed by relevant evidence within the specified timeframes and submit the same to H.E the Governor, Kitui County.
In the performance of its functions, the Committee will have all the powers necessary to:
(a) Review reports and literature that may inform it on its mandate;
(b) Have access to all reports and documents necessary for the effective discharge of its mandate;
(c)  Hold private hearings whenever it becomes necessary to instil confidence in the people appearing before the committee to allay their fears of adversity or reprisals;
(d) Receive written memoranda from individuals and groups on all issues relevant to its mandate;
(e)  Have access to all reports and documents necessary for the effective discharge of its mandate;
(f)   To summon any one person deemed to hold relevant information in the course of this inquiry; and
(g) To seek clarification from any institution in line with the mandate.
Complementary Information and Requirements:
The following complementary information and requirements for the assignment shall apply:
(a) The Committee is required to prepare and present their Concept Note including clear interpretation of the terms of reference and a detailed programme of work on or before Tuesday, 16th February, 2016 and submit same to the Ag. County Secretary within one (1) week of their appointment for approval by the Office of the Governor;
(b) The County Government will, through the Office of the County Secretary, facilitate the work of the Committee including providing them with an office from where they will operate as well as normal office secretarial services and logistical support;
(c)  The Investigations Committee may request the County Government of Kitui to seek the services of any specialist deemed necessary to provide support to the Committee in their work;
(d) The 1st Interim Report is to be submitted on or before Tuesday, 15th March, 2016; whilst the Final Report shall be submitted on or before Thursday, 28th April, 2016. The specified timeframes and deadlines are to be strictly adhered to since no extension of time will be granted;
(e)  Remuneration rates for the Committee will be as stated in the separate letter on payable remuneration which will be computed on the basis of signed and documented attendance of scheduled meetings and satisfactory completion and delivery of specified outputs relating to the assignment and programme of work, among others;
(f)   The Team may, subject to approval by the Appointing Authority, split into smaller groups or organize themselves in other appropriate ways to enable them to undertake the work expeditiously.
3.    The duration the Committee shall undertake and complete the assignment is three (3) months from 1st February, 2016 to 30th April, 2016.
Dated the 21st January, 2016
JULIUS M. MALOMBE,
MR/8406317                                            Governor, Kitui County.

