
				Page: 158GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  387
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF WEST POKOT
WEST POKOT COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
Yearly Report for the Period 1st  January, 2015 to December, 2015
Introduction
The County Public Service Board is a statutory body created pursuant to section 57 of the County Government Act, 2012. The West Pokot County Public Service Board was inaugurated on 18th September, 2013.
1.0     Overview of West Pokot County Public Service Board achievements
In submitting this report, the Board recognises its primary obligation to promote the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. The report will highlight on the achievements realised during the year, the challenges encountered so far and recommendations on how best the challenges can be addressed.
The report is submitted in fulfilment of Section 59 (d) of the County Government Act, 2012, which requires the Board to prepare regular reports for submission to the County Assembly.
2.0     Programmes undertaken towards the promotion of values and principles
In line with the requirement of section 59( 4) (a) of the County Government Act, No. 17 of 2012, the Board visited Pokot Central and Pokot South to inform and educate County Public Officers  on the values and Principles of public service. This was done in the month of May, 2015
2.1  Recruitment and absorption of staff
The West Pokot County Public Service Board absorbed a total of 72 health staff working under Economic Stimulus Programme (ESP) contract on 5th January, 2015.
The absorption of 8 doctors which include; 5 medical officers, 1 pharmacist and 2 dental officers who were posted by Transition Authority (TA) was made on 29th May, 2015.
Recruited Sub-County and Ward Administrators for four (4) and twenty (20) Sub- Counties and Wards respectively on 10th March, 2015.
 Recruited 3 quantity surveyors, 1 electrical engineer and 1 mechanical engineer on 5th November, 2015.
The Board, followed the one-third (1/3) gender rule, principle of equity, national unity, inclusiveness and equality (Article 10 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010) when it     performed the above activities.
The Board fully adhered to its mandate of being responsive, prompt and effective and equitable in the provision of services to the people.
2.2  Promotions 
 Promotions were effected as provided in for in Article 232 (g) of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. The Board considered merit as the basis of promotions.
In the month of October, promotions for health personnel in common cadre was conducted this include; health records and information, nutrition and dietetics, pharmaceutical, clinical officers, clericals, health and administration, laboratory technologist, medical engineering technologist, public health officers, plaster technicians drivers and support staff.
2.3  Capacity Assessment and Rationalization of the Public service (CARPS) exercise.
The Board was instrumental in the exercise that kicked off in February 2015. The overall objective of CARPS exercise is to align Government structures and programmes to the functions of National and County Governments to enhance efficiency and effectiveness in public service delivery. A Bio metric data capture of every individual officer was done. A report of the results is still in progress. 
2.4  Job Evaluation Exercise
The Board was involved in the job evaluation exercise conducted by the Salaries and Remuneration Commission.
This was carried out in the whole country to determine the worth of each public sector job and come up with institutional grading structures. A job analysis team was formed comprising Human Resource Officers and Directors from all departments. The team thereafter guided their colleagues in filling the job analysis questionnaires.
2.5     Policy Making Process
In its mandate of involving the people in the process of policy making, the Board captured the contributions of members of the public in drafting the CPSB Bill and its Strategic Plan
2.5.1  Public Participation on the County Public Service Board Bill.
The County Public Service Board Bill of August, 2014 was forwarded to County Assembly for their input and final debate after undergoing public participation on 23rd March, 2015 at Mtelo Hall.
2.5.2   West Pokot County Public Service Board Strategic Plan
The Board developed a five year strategic plan to cover the period 2014-2018.The Board and Secretariat were subjected to a rigorous exercise during this process. It was thereafter subjected to public participation in the month of July 2015.
2.6    Vetting of Polytechnic instructors
In order to maintain high standards of professional ethics, a total number of nineteen (19) instructors were vetted by the Board.  Five (5) were female and fourteen (14) male. Nine (9) were Diploma holders while nine (9) had certificates. One was engaged on contract terms of service since he had reached the age of fifty (50). He had an experience of over sixteen (16) years and was a manager at Kapenguria Youth Polytechnic.
2.7    Co-operation with other institutions
 The Board co-operated with other institutions working in the field of good governance in the public service (Article 59 (4) (h)) of the County Government Act, No 17 of 2012.
2.8    Benchmarking Exercise
A benchmarking exercise was undertaken between 9th August to 16th August, 2015 with the County Public Service Boards of Busia, Narok, Elgeyo Marakwet and Baringo counties. This was as per the directive given by His Excellency the Governor mainly to give guidance on placement of job groups for Ward and Sub-County Administrators, other areas of concern included;
Recruitment, selection and placement of staff.
Salary disparities and allowances for public servants.
Schemes of service for different cadres of employees.
Development of HR policies.
Payroll management
Management of casuals and
Promotion of staff.
The exercise ended with a courtesy call to the offices of the Salaries and Remuneration Commission (SRC), Public Service Commission (PSC) and the Directorate of Public Service Management (DPSM) for further guidance on the above matters.
2.9    Audit and Verification of Health Staff
The Board  complied with the requirement of section 59 (4) (e) of the County Government Act, No. 17 of 2012, with a view to assessing and inspecting the status of compliance with the values and principles of public service.
The audit and verification of health staff was conducted from 7th to 18th September, 2015.    The main objective of the exercise was to ascertain the exact number of health staff.
The exercise too, was to guide on the promotions that intended to be made in the financial year.
2.10      Short Listing and Interviewing of Health Staff
The Board shortlisted and interviewed health staffs in the month of November, 2015 for various cadres as is shown below:
Registered Health Community Nurses.
Registered Clinical Officers.
Laboratory Technologist.
Nutritionists.
Public Health Officers.
Pharmaceutical Technologist.
Health Records and Information Officers.
Community Oral Health Officers.
Physiotherapist.
Radiographers.
Medical Engineering Technologist.
 
3.0     Decisions made by the Board on the violation of the values and principles of public service
The Board on its own initiative carried out investigations on the violation of the values and principles of public service. Consequently, in the month of May it made a request to the Kenya National Examination Council (KNEC) for verification of certificates for Drivers, Records Management Officers and Ward Administrators.
Consequently, an internal investigation was carried out on one officer working as a driver with the Board. The investigations revealed that the said driver fraudulently used another person’s academic certificates for purposes of employment.
Steps taken
 The driver was issued with a show cause letter giving him an opportunity to exonerate himself.
The officer was then given a period of twenty one (21) days to give his reply.
The disciplinary committee discussed the response and he was given an opportunity to defend himself.
Further investigations found the driver guilty of the said offence and h was subsequently dismissed.
4.0     Recommendations to be implemented in the promotion of values and principles
The Board has faced various challenges in its promotion of the values and principles.
Office Space
The Board lacks adequate office space to cater for its entire staff.
Budget
The Board does not have its own vote; it has been operating within the Governor’s office budget vote. For this reason it cannot determine its actual expenditure.
Inadequate funding and insufficient provision of resources have been identified as major challenge.
The Board thus requests to have its own vote in the next financial year.
Vehicles
The board does not have sufficient vehicles to carry out its mandate.
Recommendations
Facilitation of capacity building and civic education.
Provision of adequate resources and funding
Development of relevant policies from the Board that comply with Constitution requirements
Periodic Monitoring and Evaluation of employees to ensure effective and efficient service delivery.
Recruitment of personnel by the Board that have the requisite skills and expertise required in their areas of service.
Dated the 20th January, 2016.
CAROLINE CHEPTOO,
MR/8406372    Secretary/CEO, County Public Service Board.

