
				Page: 1333GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3545
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED KISERIAN SEWERAGE SYSTEM AND SEWERAGE TREATMENT WORKS IN KISERIAN LOCATION, NGONG DIVISION OF KAJIADO COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Athi Water Services Board) is proposing toestablish a  System and Sewerage Treatment Plant located on the foothills of Ngong Hills, Kiserian Town, Kiserian Location, Ngong Division of Kajiado County on the coordinates 1° 25‘39‘‘ North and 36° 41‘ 52‘‘East, approximately 30 Km to the South West of Nairobi City.
The project has two main components i.e the sewers and the sewage treatment works which have been designed to handle 6000m3 of waste water per day. The area to be served by the proposed project is approximately 6.0 km2 and comprises of the built-up areas of Kiserian Town that can be connected to a gravity-based sewerage system that drains into a sewage treatment works to be located at a position downstream of Kiserian Dam.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Potential Impact


Mitigation Measures


CONSTRUCTION PHASE


Air pollution


Implmaprogram for construction equipment, machines and vehicles.
Adhere to safe work procedures and instructions to avoid machine idling.
Implement dust control methods on-site and offsite i.e. during material transportation.


Water pollution


Provide sanitation facilities on site.
Implement proper material storage facilities  on site to prevent spillages.
Develop and implement  a proper waste management programme on site.
Restore disturbed areas as work progresses to avoid siltation of the nearby water body.
Clearance of vegetation must be avoided especially during rainy season.


Soil erosion and contamination


Only remove vegetation from areas for the STW/sewers construction.
Install appropriate drainage systems to direct water away from slopes.
Avoid traversing of bare soil by vehicles to reduce soil compaction.
Designate a main access route for heavy machinery.
Proper containment of hazardous materials e.g. diesel and train workers of emergency response.


Solid wastes


Implement an integrated solid wastes management system to ensure proper containment, collection, disposal or treatment as may be necessary.
Train workers on solid waste management.


Noise and vibration


Employ best available work practices to minimize occupational noise levels.
Regular inspection and maintenance of equipment.
Follow safe work procedures/instructions
Implement noise conservation programme.


Disturbance of traffic and difficulty of access


Provide diversion routes where possible and erect warning signs of ongoing works.
Expedite construction works so as to reduce the times where roads are blocked.
Alternatives access ways should be communicated to the community.


Damage of underground infrastructure


Sensitize workers carrying out excavations.
Work closely with the responsible institutions so that incase of damage, the services are restored within the shortest time.


Occupational  health and safety management


Implement an occupational health and safety programme.


Sanitation and hygiene


Provide adequate water supply and sanitation facilities.


Social conflicts


Implement a community engagement programme.


Displacement of people


Implement the Resettlement Action Plan.


OPERATIONAL PHASE


Water and soil pollution from leaks and sewage overflow


Ensure sufficient  hydraulic  capacity  to accommodate  peak flows  and adequate slope in gravity mains to prevent build-up of solids and hydrogen sulphide generation.
Design manhole covers to withstand anticipated loads and ensure that the covers can be readily replaced if broken to minimize  entry of garbage  and silt into the system.
Develop and implement a maintenance programme to ensure regular cleaning, repairs, inspection and monitoring.
Implement emergency response mechanism to ensure that leakages, blockages are reported and actioned on promptly.


Accidents and injuries


Implement safety program to identify all the risks, associated hazards and mitigation measures.
Implement accident prevention, reporting and investigation programme.
Train workers on safety and accident prevention.
Implement community safety programme.


Exposure to hazardous chemicals


Implement a training program for operators who work with chlorine and ammonia regarding safe handling practices and emergency response procedures.
Provide appropriate personal protective equipment and training on its proper use and maintenance.
Develop and implement hazardous materials safety program and train workers on it.
Implement emergency response and preparedness in regards to hazardous materials and train workers on it.
Continuously monitor air quality in work areas for hazardous conditions (e.g. explosive atmosphere, oxygen deficiency).


Liquid effluents


Ensure that the sewerage treatment plant is well designed and is  efficiently working so as to achieve the quality of effluent discharged is consistent with applicable national requirements or  internationally accepted standards.
Implement effluent sampling and analysis program to ensure periodic monitoring and maintenance of the quality within acceptable limits.
Develop, implement and ensure adherence to safe operating procedures. 


Solid waste such as sludge


Develop and implement fecal sludge management system including appropriate sludge treatment technologies, collection methods, disposal and/or reuse.
Implement an integrated solid waste management program.


Offensive Odours


Provide adequate buffer area, such as trees, or fences, between processing areas and potential receptors.
Cover emission points and implement air emission monitoring programme.
Consider alternate aeration technologies or process configurations to reduce volatilization where necessary.


Public health issues related to irrigation with treated sewage


Consider use of drip irrigation of treated wastewater, which minimizes worker exposure and the amount of water needed.
Adequate treatment of wastewater and sludge to acceptable quality.
Limit irrigation with treated wastewater to crops that are cooked before eating;


Risks of wildlife and rodents attractions to the site


Properly secure the treatment plant.
Maintaining high standards of  hygiene at the site throughout the operation phase of the facility.
Proper solid waste management.

 
 
 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413688         National Environment Management Authority.

