
				Page: 1337GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3548
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED AVIC INTERNATIONAL AFRICA HEADQUARTERS IN WESTLANDS, PLOT L.R. NO. 209/73/1, 6; 209/74/3, 4, 6 NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Avic-International Real Estate (Kenya) Limited, is proposing to develop a Mixed Development Project on Plot L.R. Nos: 209/74/3, 4, 6 (East of Chiromo Lane) and 209/74/3, 4, 6 (West of Chiromo Lane), off the main Nairobi-Nakuru highway (Chiromo Road), along Chiromo Lane, Westlands, Nairobi City County.
The project involves construction of an Office Tower; Hotel Tower; 4 Apartment Towers,  a 2 levels bridge over Chiromo Lane and an underground tunnel below Chiromo Lane connecting a Commercial Podium on the Western side of ChiromoLane to Podium on the Eastern side of the lane among other auxiliary facilities.  The total project area shall be on approximately 7.5 acres (30,736 m2) of land with the built up area being approximately 24,588.80m2.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


Increased solid waste generation


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: 1 Source reduction, 2. Recycling, 3. Composting and reuse, 4. Combustion,  5 sanitary land filling.
Engaging NEMA registered waste disposal/handling company for transport and dispose the solid waste from site.
Use of durable, long-lasting materials that will not need to be replaced as often and those that have minimal or no packaging.
Order materials in the sizes and quantities they will be needed.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure to the elements.


Noise pollution


Install portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationary equipment where necessary.
Workers in the vicinity in areas with high level noise to wear appropriate safety and protective gear.
Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation.
Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used.


Project implementation disputes


Land transfer agreements should be formalized before the project starts as per the laws of the land.
Sufficient planning for adequate resources required i.e. financial, personnel and equipment.
Community support mobilization and sensitization through consultative forums or questionnaire methods.


High Demand of Raw material


Proper storage of materials to reduce damage or loss of materials at the construction site.
Ensure accurate budgeting and estimation of actual construction material requirements.
Proper storage of materials to reduce damage/loss of materials at the construction site.


Increased energy consumption


Ensure electrical equipment, appliances, lights, and vehicles are switched off when not being used.
Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.


High water demand
 


Install water conserving taps that turn-off automatically when water is not being used.
Promptly detect and repair water pipe and tank leaks.
Sensitize staff to conserve water.
Promote recycling and reuse of water as much as possible.


Generation of wastewater


Conduct regular checks for pipe blockages or damages.
Ensure that the effluent generated is monitored for its quality should meet the stipulated standards and it’s directed to the existing sewerage treatment plant.


Dust generation


Spray uncovered and lose earth surfaces with water.
Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand and other loose materials.
Personal Protective equipment to be worn always when at work place.
Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Use of dust nets to harness possible dust from the development.


Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


Install appropriate drainage infrastructures.
Ensure management of excavation activities.
Construction vehicles to be restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.
Landscaping of disturbed and open surfaces.
Compacted areas should be ripped to reduce run-off.
Harvest and recycle storm water for utilization within the site.


Exhaust Emissions


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized
Equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.
Modern Equipment with high combustion rates shall be used by the contractor.
Vehicles and machinery not in use shall be switched off.


Road Safety and Traffic Congestion


Road signs on main roads.
Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles.
Implement a comprehensive Traffic Management Plan.
Minimize the haulage and transportation of construction of materials during peak hours using public roads.
Use of reflective jackets among other PPEs to avoid accidents.


Occupational Health and Safety


Provide suitable safety gear for all personnel in various construction areas.
Equipment such as fire extinguishers must be examined by a government authorized person.
Well stocked first aid box which is easily available and accessible, should be provided within the premises.
Train workers in first aid by a recognized body.
Conducting Environmental Health and Safety Audits as per the EMCA 1999 and OHS, 2007.


Vegetation disturbance


Design and implement an appropriate landscaping programme to help in re-vegetation of part of the project area.
Introduction of vegetation (trees, shrubs and grass) on open spaces and their maintenance.
Designate access routes and parking within the site.
Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area to be affected by construction works.


Insecurity


Body-search the workers on entry, to avoid getting weapons on site, and leaving site to ensure nothing is stolen.
Ensure only authorized personnel get to the site.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413774         National Environment Management Authority.

