
				Page: 1327GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3920
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
TANA RIVER COUNTY GOVERNEMENT
OFFICE OF THE COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
ANNUAL REPORT ON MEASURES TAKEN AND PROGRESS ACHIEVED IN THE REALISATION OF ARTICLE 10 AND 232 VALUES AND PRINCIPLES, 2014
MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIRPERSON
Tana River County has been marginalized for a very long time resulting into not only the numerous challenges that threaten our social, political and economic development and but also negatively impact on the realization and prioritization of our national interests. These challenges included:   abuse of human rights;  insecurity;  proliferation  of  illegal  arms   and  cattle  rustling; poor management of natural resources such as land; inequitable distribution of opportunities  and   public  resources;  and challenges emanating from adverse climate  and  national  disasters.  
The  values  and  principles  enshrined in Article 10 and  232 of the revised Kenya Constitution, 2010  are  at  the  core  of  the intricate relationship between the government and its citizenry. They are the yardstick that influences the nature and quality of interactions between and within these two segments of society. These values and principles are fundamental in shaping what choices individuals as well as communities make.  Creating  awareness  on  the values  therefore  requires  a  conscious  and  deliberate  process  in  making sure that these values are expressed, discussed, manifested and adhered to in order to shape our dialogue. Embracing  Article 10 and  232 will  further enable  us  transform  Tana River   into  a county  of choice in  the  country as the values and principles  instill meaning, significance and direction to all county endeavors and affirm our unique identity. 
The broad objective of this report is to outline the extent to which the values and principles referred to in articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service. The specific objectives of this report include to:
(a) Outline all the steps taken and decisions made by the board in the realization of Article10 and 232.
(b) Make specific recommendations that require to be implemented in the promotion and protection of the values and principles.
(c)  outline specific decisions on particulars of persons  or  public  body  who  have  violated  the  values  and principles, including action taken or recommended against them.
(d) Enumerate any impediment in the promotion of the values and principles.
(e)  Outline the  programmes  the  board  is  undertaking  or has planned to undertake in the medium term towards  the  promotion  of  the  values  and principles.
The board is committed to the full implementation of  the Constitution  with  a  view  of  ensuring  that  all  the  citizens  appreciate  that they  are  members  of  the  same  community  engaged  in  a  common enterprise  of  national  development  while  facing  shared  challenges  and opportunities. To ensure national unity Board recognizes the  diversity of the different communities living in the county and the country at large and has always  ensured equitable  representation  in  recruitment,  equal  treatment  and  access  to  services  for  all. The board is guided by democracy that is issue-based, people-centered, results-oriented and accountable to the public. 
ADHAN NURI BERHE 
Chairperson
Tana River County Public Service Board.
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Steps Taken and Decisions Made by the board to comply with Article 10 and 232
Table 2: Recommendations for Promotion and Protection of the Values and Principles
Table 3: Mid-Term Programmes Towards Promotion and Protection of the Values and Principles
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The national values and principles of governance are fundamental norms and beliefs of Kenyans that guide choices, actions, relations and behaviors of citizens. They are the foundation upon which the realization of Kenya’s national interests is pegged. The values and principles of public service however depict the desirable culture and conduct of the public service.
This is the second annual report on the realization of national values and principles of governance in Tana River County. The objective of this annual reporting that  is  enshrined  in  the  County Government Act, 2012  is  to  identify  and document the measures taken, progress achieved and challenges faced in the realization  of  national  values  and  principles  of  governance  by  the respective  public  institutions.  Further, the report will provide direction, strategies and interventions that will enhance the promotion of the same.
The report is divided into seven chapters. Chapter  one  lays  the  background  to  the  report  by  discussing  the constitutional requirement that guides its preparation. Chapter two highlights the steps taken and decisions made by the board to comply with each value and principles referred to in articles 10 and 232. Primary focus is placed on the extent to which County Public Service Board have operationalized the values and principles. Chapter three outlines the recommendations for promotion and protection of the values and principles. The  challenges  faced  by  public  institutions  in  their  efforts  to  realize national  values  have  been  analyzed  in  chapter  five.  Finally, chapter six highlights mid-term programmes towards the promotion of the values and principles in Tana River County’s while chapter seven outlines the way forward and conclusions. 
CHAPTER ONE:  INTRODUCTION
The constitution of Kenya, 2010 requires all state organs at both national and county level to be guided by the national values and principles of governance and values and principles of public Service in discharging their functions.
The  national  values  and  principles  of  governance  are  fundamental norms  and  beliefs  of  Kenyans  that  guide  choices,  actions,  relations  and behaviors of citizens. The values and principles of Governance influence the way individuals relate with one another, how  communities engage one another  and  how  citizens  and  government  interact  in  promoting  national cohesion, integration, peace and development. The National Values and Principles of Governance referred to in article 10 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 include:
(a)     Patriotism, national unity, sharing and devolution of power, the rule of law, democracy and participation of people.
(b)     Human dignity, equity, social justice, inclusiveness, equality, human rights, non-discrimination and protection of the marginalized.
(c)      Good governance, integrity, transparency and accountability; and sustainable development.
The values and principles of Public Service are fundamental norms and beliefs of public servants that shape the culture in public service. The values and principles of Public Service form the foundation upon which the realization and prioritization of national interests is anchored.   Article 232 provides the values and principles of Public Service. This include:
(a)     High standards of professional ethics.
(b)     Efficient, effective and economic use of resource.
(c)      Responsive, prompt, effective, impartial and equitable provision of services.
(d)     Involvement of the people in the process of policy making.
(e)      Accountability for administrative acts.
(f)       Transparency and provision to the public of timely accurate information.
(g)     Subject to paragraphs (h) and (i), fair competition and merit as the basis of appointments and promotions.
(h)     Representation of Kenya’s diverse communities; and
(i)       Affording adequate and equal opportunities for appointment, training and  advancement, at all levels of the public service of—
(i)       men and women;
(ii)      the members of all ethnic groups; and
(iii)    persons with disabilities
In its preamble the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 recognizes the aspirations of all Kenyans for a Government based on the essential values of human rights, equality, freedom, democracy, social justice and the rule of law.  Further, the Constitution in Article 4 (2) emphasizes the importance of national values and provides that “The Republic of Kenya shall be a multi-party democratic state founded on the national values and principles of governance.”
The County Public Service Board is mandated by section 59 1 (f)  of the County Government Act to evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values and principles referred to in articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service.
This report outlines all the steps taken and decisions made by the board, specific  recommendations that  require  to be implemented in the promotion and protection of the values and principles; specific decisions on particulars of persons or  public  body  who  have  violated  the  values  and principles, including action taken or recommended against them ;any  impediment  in  the  promotion  of  the values and principles; and the  programmes  the  board  is  undertaking or has planned to undertake in the medium term towards  the  promotion  of  the  values  and principles.
CHAPTER TWO: STEPS TAKEN AND DECISIONS MADE BY THE BOARD
The Tana River County Public Service Board   is committed to the values and principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232. To promote and ensure compliance with the values and principles the board has instituted the following measures.
Table 1: Steps taken and decisions made by the board to comply with Article 10 and 232

National values and principles of governance referred to in Article 10  


Steps taken and decisions made by the board


Article 10 (2) (a): Patriotism, national unity, the rule of law, democracy and participation of the people


Compliance with the Kenya Heroes Bill, 2013 and National Honours Act No.11 of 2013 and other relevant legislative provisions.
Participation in national public holidays.
The  County Government  has  embarked  on comprehensive reforms in the public service which include among others leadership development.
The board fosters national unity by recognizing diversity of the different communities living in the county and the country at large. board services are rendered to all.
To foster the rule of law all the board performs its functions in accordance with the Public Service policies and guidelines on Human resource management and development.
While making decisions the board is guided by democracy that is issue-based, people-centered, results-oriented and accountable to the public. 
The board is committed to enacting, reviewing and/or implementing policies and legislation that will transform the Public Service and facilitate the realization of sustainable work force.
Implementation  of  the  policy  on national cohesion  and  integration which provides  a  guide  for  the promotion  of  national  unity  by  all  institutions  and  establishes  a  coordination  framework  for  national  unity  initiatives.
Honoring heroes and heroines who have made tremendous achievement in leadership, respect for the flag hoisting ceremonies.


Article 10 (2) (a): Sharing and devolution of power


In  order  to  operationalise  the  devolved  system  of  Government,  the board established the  sub-county  county  and ward  administrator offices and recruited officers to hold the offices.
The board has established Human Resource Management units in the health department  to facilitate handling of human resource issues particularly personnel records administration
Compliance with legislative  provisions supporting devolution such as; the  Transition  to  Devolved  Governments  Act,  2012  which provides  a  framework  for  the  transition  to  devolved  government;  the County  Governments  Act No.  17  of  2012,  that  provides  for  county governments powers,  functions  and  responsibilities  to  deliver  services; the  Urban  Areas  and  Cities  Act No. 12  of  2012  that  provides  for  the classification,  governance  and  management  of  urban  areas  and  cities; Intergovernmental  Relations  Act, 2012  that  establishes  a  framework  for consultation  and  co-operation  between  the  national  and  county governments  and  amongst  county  governments;  and  County Government Public Finance Transition Act,  No. 8 of 2013 that provides a framework of establishment and functions of transition county treasuries, the transition county budget process, transition revenue raising measures and expenditures .
Various departments are devolving their functions for instance the finance and planning department has established revenue offices in each sub-county.


Article 10 (2) (b): Human dignity, equity, social justice,
inclusiveness, equality, human rights, non-discrimination and protection of the marginalized


To protect the Bill of Rights the board established compliance and Enforcement department to establish internal checks and balances to guard against violation of   values and principles.
To address inequality the board ensured equitable  representation  in  recruitment,  equal  treatment  and  access  to  services  for  all. As at January, 2015 65% of the staff establishment in Tana River County Government comprised of persons from dominant communities in the county while 35% are persons from other communities. Of this 63% are male while the female are 37%.
To address equity in delivery of services, social justice and protection of the marginalized the board recruited over 150 health staff and confirmed all the ESP staff in the county  whose contract with the national Government  had expired  to ensure health services are being offered to the citizens at  all  health  centres  and  dispensaries in the county.
Reservation of  5%  of  employment  opportunities  in  the County Public Service establishment for persons with disabilities and compliance with their  set  their retirement age of 65  years  for  entire  Public  Service.
Some positions were ring fenced for marginalized communities in the county.


Article 10 (2) (c): Good governance, integrity,
transparency and accountability


Compliance with various  laws   providing for good governance for instance the  Leadership and  Integrity Act,  No. 19 of 2012, as well as the Ethics and Anti-corruption Commission Act,  No. 22 of 2011. Other legislations include the Public Financial Management Act, No.18 of 2012, chapter six of the Constitution.
Compliance with public procurement procedures by ensuring open and transparent tendering procedures as well as the periodic monitoring, evaluation and reporting by the board.
All job opportunities in the County Public Service are published in the local newsprint in circulation in the county to encourage women, persons with disabilities and the marginalized groups to apply.


Article 10 (2) (d): sustainable development


Enforcement  of the MTP II policy measures which outlines a broad macro-economic  framework that  guides  policies,  legislations, institutional  and  structural  reforms  toward implementation of the  Kenya  Vision  2030.
The board has aligned its programmes to the County Integrated Results Transformation Framework that is inclined to the MTP II and vision 2030.
The board in collaboration with the County Government has embarked on a programme of developing specialized skills to provide impetus to the economic growth and sustainable development. Such skills are being developed in the field of mining, health and petroleum engineering.
Compliance with legislation that support promotion of sustainable development including the Environmental Management and Co-ordination Act, No.  8  of  1999 which  provides  for  the  establishment  of  an  appropriate  legal  and institutional framework for the management of the environment.
To enhance County  security  for sustainable  development  the Board is recruiting  80 more  enforcement officers.


Values and principles of Public Service referred to in Article 232


Steps taken and decisions made by the board


Article 232  (1) (a): High standards of professional ethics;


The Board incorporates professional qualifications and membership to professional bodies as a requisite for  persons  holding or acting in the technical offices to foster professionalism.
In filling vacancies in the public office the Board ensures that the person satisfies all the prescribed qualifications for holding that public office.
Development of County codes of conduct that outline ethical  behaviour  and  how  members  of  staff  discharge  their  duties.
Enforcement of the code of conducts and ethics.
Introduction of suggestion / Complaints Box and  customer complaints desk.


Article 232  (1) (b): Efficient, effective and economic use of resource;


The board has developed the board strategic plan, service charter and the integrated performance management and accountability framework.
The board has signed a performance agreement and staff performance evaluations and appraisal.
Compliance with the Public Financial Management Act, No. 18 of 2012 that provides for effective management of public finances. 
Build  the capacity of the County Public Service through induction and career development.


Article 232  (1) (c): Responsive, prompt, effective, impartial and equitable provision of services;


The board endeavors to recruit fit for purpose work force.
Leverage the use of  ICT in communication
According employment opportunities to diverse communities in the county. The County public service has staff from across the county


Article 232 (1) (d): involvement of the people in the process of policy making;


Advertisement of vacancies and tenders in the newspapers with national circulation.
Incorporation of citizen views and suggestions in budgeting.


Article 232 (1) (e): Accountability for administrative acts;


Use of the Integrated Payroll Personnel Data system and technical manuals and adherence to internal payroll controls in the county payroll system to ensure accountability, efficiency and effectiveness in payroll management.
Compliance with the  Public  Financial Management Act,  No.18 of 2012 that provides for effective management of  public  finances  by  national  and  county  governments 


Article 232 10 (1) (f): Transparency and provision to the public of timely accurate information


Compliance with Leadership and Integrity Act No. 19 of 2012 as well as the Ethics and Anti-corruption Commission Act,  No. 22 of 2011and  chapter six of the Constitution


Article 232 10 (1) (g): Fair competition and merit as the basis of appointments and promotions;


Advertisement of vacancies in the newspapers with national circulation to all competition.
Adherence to the indents specified in the recruitment request from the user department.
Promotions t o based on the performance of the individual staff as evidenced by their staff performance appraisal report.


Article 232 10 (1) (h): Representation of Kenya’s diverse communities; and


The Board endeavors to provide adequate and equal opportunities for all Kenya’s diverse communities as a basic tenet of ensuring equitable representation of Kenya’s diverse communities in Public appointments.


Article 232 10 (1) (i): Affording adequate and equal opportunities for appointment, training and  advancement, at all levels of the public service


The board has committed itself in ensuring that all policies promoting cohesiveness are implemented.  These include the Policy on National Cohesion and Integration, Disability
Policy  of  2006,  National  Youth  Policy  of  2006  and  National  Gender Policy  of  2000. 

CHAPTER THREE: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PROMOTION AND PROTECTION ARTICLE 10 AND 232
The board recommends the following measures to promote and protect the values and principles in Article 10 and 232.
Table 2: Recommendations for promotion and protection of the values and principles

National Values and principles of governance referred to in Article 10  


Recommendations for promotion and protection of the values and principles


Article 10 (2) (a): Patriotism, national unity, the rule of law, democracy and participation of the people


Holding of monthly prayers for the country and county.
Institutionalizing legal,  policy,  institutional  and administrative  measures  that  create  an  enabling  environment  for  the realization  of  patriotism,  national  unity,  the  rule  of  law,  democracy  and participation  of  the  people.
Routine national flag hoisting ceremonies and theme events depicting pride in our nationhood.
Use of  sports  in  the  promotion  of  national  unity,  loyalty  and patriotism. 
Promote  citizens  understanding  for  purposes  of peace and national cohesion.


Article 10 (2) (a): Sharing and devolution of power


Dissemination of copies of the Kenya Constitution 2010, the County Government Act and other legislations supporting devolution.
Decentralization of functions.


Article 10 (2) (b): Human dignity, equity, Social justice,
Inclusiveness, equality, Human rights, non-discrimination and protection of the marginalized


Mainstreaming  Human  Rights  Based Approach  (HRBA)  in  Devolution  and  Planning .
Continuous  civic  education  through various  Government  agencies.
Incorporating gender, youth, disability, and minority concerns  in  planning,  reporting,  monitoring  and  evaluation  in  order  to address  gender  disparities  and  inequalities inclusiveness and non-discrimination.
Establishment of  the Huduma Kenya centres in the county to facilitate access of  information  and services  by  members  of  the  public  in  an  open  and transparent manner to ensure inclusiveness and non-discrimination.
Enforcement  of  the  Government’s  affirmative  action  policy providing for a minimum of 30% of government tenders to be reserved for women,  youth  and  persons  with  disability.
Promotion of the rights of the marginalized, minority  and  indigenous  people  through  sensitization  and  advocacy  for their  rights.
Involvement  of  staff,  stakeholders  and  customers  in  decision  making processes.
Continually conduct sensitization programs on disability and gender  to  ensure  equal  treatment  of  staff,  stakeholders  and  customers.
The Board should develop strategies and requisite structures necessary for leveraging on information, education and communication to enhance operational efficiency in service delivery.
Installation of CCTV cameras in strategic places to address crime and insecurity.


Article 10 (2) (c): Good governance, integrity, transparency and accountability


Continuous sensitization of  staff  on  management  and  integrity  issues  in public institutions.
Training of integrity assurance officers to carry out corruption risk assessment and coordinate the implementation of corruption prevention programs with the assistance of the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC).
Undertaking corruption risk assessment,
Establishment of corruption prevention  committees.   
Instituting sanctions  on  officers  who engage  in  dishonest  and  corrupt  practices.
Conducting a countywide   public  awareness campaign  to  effect  fundamental  changes  in  the  attitude  and  behavior  of citizens towards  corruption.
Provision of  platforms  for  dialogue  with  other sectors of the society such as the media breakfast meeting and peace  meetings  organized  to  foster  peace  and  unity  across  the  county.


Article 10 (2) (d): sustainable development


Build and nature Public Private Partnerships in line with Public Private Partnerships (PPP) Act, No. 15 of 2013 which provides for the framework for the participation of the private sector  in  the  financing,  construction,  development,  operation  or maintenance of infrastructure or development projects of the government through  concession  or  other  contractual  arrangements.
undertake advocacy on core development issues such  as  agriculture,  education,  health,  security, economics,  sustainable  environment  among others.


Values and principles of Public Service referred to in Article 232


Recommendations for Ppomotion and protection of the values and principles.


Article 232  (1) (a): High standards of professional ethics;


Include professional trainings in the staff training plan.


Article 232  (1) (b): Efficient, effective and economic use of resource;


Design instruments for ensuring efficient and effective delivery of the public services1. This includes the website and a lean organization structure. 
Implementation of the Staff performance evaluations and appraisal recommendations.


Article 232  (1) (c): Responsive, prompt, effective, impartial and equitable provision of services;


Compliance  with  the  constitutional  provision  on the  promotion  of  equalization  in  regard  to  persons  with  disabilities, minorities  and  other  marginalized  groups.
Identifying and train bright students from across the county and bond them to provide services to the stations within their localities.
The Board shall be developing a HR strategic plan.
Networking Board offices.


Article 232 (1) (d): Involvement of the people in the process of policy making;


Establishment of strategies that facilitate continuous engagement of the general public for instance through public barazas, use of electronic and print  media  and  surveys  that  inform  decision  making  among  others. 
Conducting  periodic Public  Private  Partnership  forums  to promote  participation  of  the  private  sector  in  government’s  socioeconomic  development  initiatives.
Development of a framework for public participation.
Integrate public participation in the operations through public service open days


Article 232 (1) (e): Accountability for administrative acts;


To establish functional mechanisms to report feedback in case of service deficiency.


Article 232 10 (1) (f): Transparency and provision to the public of timely accurate information


Develop service charters to demonstrate the Board’s mandates and inform clients the  quality  of  services  to  expect  and  the  charges  they  are  expected  to  pay  hence transparency. 


Article 232 10 (1) (g): Fair competition and merit as the basis of appointments and promotions;


To establish uniform norms and standards for county Public service management and development through Operationalisation of the Tana River County Human Resource policies and procedure Manual.


Article 232 10 (1) (h): Representation of Kenya’s diverse communities; and


Evaluation and reporting on staff establishment ethnic representations.


Article 232 10 (1) (i): Affording adequate and equal opportunities for appointment, training and  advancement, at all levels of the public service


An all inclusive training plan that matches the training programmes with the staff competency gap.

CHAPTER FOUR: ACTIONS AGAINST PERSONS VIOLATING ARTICLE 10 AND 232
In the year 2014 the Board did not identify any person violating the national values and principles and therefore no action or decision to this effect was made. The short period within which the board was in office is responsible for the feedback.
CHAPTER FIVE:  IMPEDIMENT IN THE PROMOTION OF ARTICLE 10 AND 232
While undertaking measures to promote the values and principles referred to in articles 10 and 232 are complied with in the County Public Service Board faced several challenges which are discussed below.
Misinterpretation of the Constitution: The Constitution of Kenya 2010 has distinct provisions that seek to promote the creation of national identity.  However,  majority of the pubic officers in the county lack capacity to  interpret  and  fully  implement  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution thus impacting  negatively on the creation of a national identity and exercise of sovereign power.
Low levels of awareness of the Constitution amongst County and non-state actors :The low levels of awareness of  the  Constitution  amongst  state  and  non-state  actors  has  been  an impediment on the processes towards the creation of national identity.
Marginalization: For a very long time Tana River was sidelined leading to feelings of marginalization among the residents. The County is characterized by poor infrastructure and inadequate resources breeding the feelings of marginalization consequently affecting the creation of a national identity and exercise of sovereign power.
Inadequate awareness on the constitutional provisions that seek to enhance promotion of values and principles: The  low  levels  of  awareness  on  the  Constitution,  public misunderstanding  and  misinterpretation  of  legislation  and  administrative procedures  is  an  impediment  to  the  promotion of values and principles.
Inadequate funding: Inadequate funding for training and civic  education has  led  to  minimal  sensitization  and  advocacy  making  the  electorate vulnerable to manipulation.
Unclear roles definition: Lack of a common understanding of roles between the County Assemblies and the County Executives; the Senate and the Governors; Senate and the National Assembly has also contributed in undermining the implementation of devolution processes
Inadequate capacity building and sensitization on the constitutional provisions on devolution and other relevant legislations: Inadequate information on devolution has largely affected the devolution process and impacted negatively on the operations of the county governments.
Lack of understanding of financial and budgetary regulations: There is also the lack of understanding of financial and budgetary regulations including the procurement procedures. These have among other things led to misuse of the available funds and sometimes failure to use the funds altogether.
High levels of illiteracy: The high illiteracy levels in the county especially amongst women and persons with disabilities have resulted to implementation gaps in the levels of representation of the marginalized groups, particularly, women and people with disabilities. The marginalized communities hardly access formal education and even those who have hardly progress to secondary school and institutions of higher learning. This limits their chances of being engaged in high cadre jobs thus affecting the Board’s ability to comply with regional and ethnicity balance in the county public service
Inadequate implementation of policies, legislations and guidelines that protect the Bill of Rights: The County has not yet developed an affirmative policy or a county equality law  neither does the National Gender and Equality Commission have a  comprehensive  framework  to  administer  or  issue  advisories  to  other agencies  on  affirmative  action.
Lack of county database for persons with disabilities: The County does not have a complete record of the persons with disabilities to facilitate promotion of the affirmative actions. This impends protection of the marginalized.
Resistance to change by certain working groups and political interference
Inadequate implementation of policies and guidelines on transparent and accountable management of resources: The  culture  of  corruption  is  still  entrenched  in  most  sectors  and continues to be a threat to stability and attainment of the aspirations and goals . Lack of cooperation from staff involved in unethical behaviour  is an impediment to  fighting  corruption  since  it  slows  down  the  processes geared  towards  the  promotion  of  good  governance,  transparency  and accountability.  Lack of honesty and professionalism among some members of staff, stakeholders and customers was also a deterrent to integrity promotion efforts.
Structural bureaucracy and vested interests in recruitment and tendering processes: Conflict of interest and structural bureaucracy to comprise in service delivery.
Inadequate implementation of policies and legislations that seek to promote sustainable development: Weak legal, policy and institutional frameworks that  are  meant  to guide  sustainable  development  have  been  found  to  impact  negatively  on the  development  processes.
Global competition, climate changes and natural disasters: Harsh weather and climate patterns coupled natural and manmade disasters such as acts of terrorism and flooding in the County have continually affected the realization of sustained social/economic development.
CHAPTER SIX:  MID-TERM PROGRAMMES TOWARDS THE PROMOTION OF ARTICLE 10 AND 232
The Board has undertaken suggested the following strategies to promote national values and principles in the Mid-term.
Table 3: Mid-Term Programmes Towards Promotion and Protection of the Values and Principles.

National values and principles of Governance referred To In Article 10  


Mid-Term programmes towards promotion and Protection of the values and principles.


Article 10 (2) (a): Patriotism, national unity, the rule of law, democracy and Participation of the People

Operationalise the  website.
Establish structures  for  citizen  participation.


Article 10 (2) (b): Human dignity, Equity, social justice, Inclusiveness, equality, human rights, Non-discrimination and protection of the marginalized

Civic education
Huduma Kenya Centres in the county


Article 10 (2) (b): Good governance, integrity, transparency and accountability.

Training integrity assurance officers to carry out corruption risk assessment
Operationalise the County Public Service codes of conduct


Article 10 (2) (b): Sharing and Devolution of Power

Create awareness on devolution and governance
Design delegation instruments 


Article 10 (2) (d): Sustainable Development

Public private partnerships


Values and Principles of Public Service Referred to in Article 232


Mid-Term Programmes towards promotion and protection of the values and principles


Article 232  (1) (a): High standards of professional ethics;


1.Staff training and development programme


Article 232  (1) (b): Efficient, effective and economic use of resource;

Development of the 2014-2018 Strategic Plan
Operationalising the county organization structure
Develop the integrated performance management and accountability framework
Staff performance appraisal


Article 232  (1) (c): Responsive, prompt, effective, impartial and equitable provision of services;

Development of the strategic  HR Plan to inform recruitment  timeline
Establish results coach network to identify champions across the county in various fields
Networking board offices


Article 232 (1) (d): Involvement of the people in the process of policy making;


Development of a framework for public participation.


Article 232 (1) (e): Accountability for administrative acts;


Operationalise the suggestion and Customer complaints box


Article 232 10 (1) (f): Transparency and provision to the public of timely accurate information


Operationalise the board service charter


Article 232 10 (1) (g): Fair competition and merit as the basis of appointments and promotions;


Document the HR policies and procedure Manual
 


Article 232 10 (1) (h): Representation of Kenya’s diverse communities; and


Staff ethnic audit and rationalization programme


Article 232 10 (1) (i): Affording adequate and equal opportunities for appointment, training and  advancement, at all levels of the public service


Operationalise the HR policies and procedure Manual

CHAPTER SEVEN:  CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD
Full operationalisation of Article 10 on national values and principles of governance and Article 232 on values and principles of Public Service will ensure a cohesive, integrated and united Kenyan society and efficient and effective Public Service. These values and principles in Article 10 and 232 build on various current and future legislations including the Ethics and Ant-corruption Commission Act, the Leadership and Integrity Act and the Economic Crimes Act. The Bill of Rights  provides  for  equality  and  freedom  from  discrimination guaranteeing  the  basic  economic  and  social  rights  of  all  while encouraging respect for diversity and fostering a sense of belonging.
As  enshrined  in  the  Constitution  of  Kenya,  2010 the  national and Public Service  values  are  a deliberate effort to facilitate far reaching transformation in the interaction between  the Government  and  its  citizenry as well as  cultivating an effective and efficient Public Service that is fit for purpose. Going forward the board in collaboration with the County Government should establish a Steering Committee and a secretariat drawn from a cross-section  of  devolved units to undertake  intensive  and  elaborate sensitization on national values to all stakeholders across the county and to  continuously  monitor  the realization of national values in all sectors of  the  society.  The committee will also receive and receive, collate and analyze reports from identified devolved units and prepare an annual County Assembly report   on measures taken and progress made in the realization of values and principles in Article 10 and 232.
To ensure effective implementation of programmes and activities on the promotion of values and principles in Article 10 and 232, the County Government through the board and the Public Service unit shall conduct a baseline survey to establish the status of the realization of national values in the county. The baseline survey  shall  cover  all  the devolved units  in  the  county,  including  the  private sector. The baseline survey will largely inform the implementation process of the of values and principles in Article 10 and 232 in regards to resource mobilization and distribution as well as the implementation strategies.
ADHAN NURI BERHE,
Chairperson,
MR/7413961                Tana River County Public Service Board.

