
				Page: 1334GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3546
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MAKANYANGA IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN MERU SOUTH SUB-COUNTY, THARAKA NITHI COUNTY
Invitation of Public Comments
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent (Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries) is proposing to put up a small scale horticulture developmenton an estimated 206 ha land which will lead to food security and make it possible for the local communities to draw economic benefits from the land and water resourcesavailable located in Igambang’ombe District, Igambang’ombe Division, Kanjuki Location, Makanyanga, Rianthiga and Marembo Sub-locations, Tharaka Nithi County,
The proposed system will consist of diversion works, conveyance, mainlines, distribution and infield systems which will comprise of the following; Plot hydrant placed at off-take to the farm,  Upvc plot feeder pipes,  4 field hydrant,  uPVC field hydrant feeder pipes, HDPE lateral pipes to supply sprinklers (24m per acre), 2 sprinklers per acre,  2 tripod stands per acre,  2 GI stand pipe,1 HDPE pipe coupler (connector), 1 HDPE female adaptor or starter coupler,  3 HDPE male adaptors, 12 GI tee,  1 GI elbow and 12 hexel nipples.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts 


Mitigation measures 


Loss of biodiversity


Establishment of tree nurseries.
Planting of vegetation to restore the lost vegetation.
Restoration of the lost biodiversity.


Soil erosion and siltation


Compaction of the loose soil.
Landscaping.
Slope stabilization.
Planting of grass and other vegetation to hold the soil firmly.
Building of gabions where severe effects are expected.
Provision of silt traps in drainage structures.


Pollution


Sprinkling water during construction phase to avoid dust being blown bywind or construction vehicles.
Regular servicing of the machines and construction vehicles to avoid theemission of smoke and other gases. This will also reduce the intensity of the noise being generated.
Proper collection and disposal of waste oil and grease to avoid soil andwater pollution.
Servicing of vehicles and plant in proper garages or workshop.


Interference with traffic flow


Proper and clearly visible road signs should be erected.
Alternative routes to be established as well as upgrading the gravel roadto the intake.
Provide traffic wardens.


Occupational health and safety


Training of workers should be provided so as to acquaint them on the operation of themachinery and equipment to avoid danger to users.
The management should provide the workers with safety instruction manuals and safetygear.
Provide footpaths and diversions as necessary.
Enhance supervision of workers.
Install warning and directional signs to control traffic.


 


Station traffic wardens on work sites along the roads and crossings.
Maintain roads in good state of repair.
Provision of health safety and welfare plans and procedures to workers on site.
Comply with Kenyan safety policy and safe working procedures, laws, regulation.
Appointment of Health, Safety and Environment Officer (HSEO).


 


Establishment of a clinic for emergency response plans.
Establish and monitor performance of health and safety committee as per the safety regulations.
Develop a site safety action plan detailing safety equipment to be used, emergency procedures, restrictions on site, frequency and personnel responsible for safety inspectionsand controls.


 


All injuries that occur on site must be recorded in the accident register and correctiveactions for their prevention be instigated as appropriate (section 62 of the Factories and Other Places of Work Act).
Emergency preparedness programme should be established.
Spill mitigation equipment including adsorbents, leakage-plugging devices, foam coverspraying equipment, oil skimmers and water spraying equipment should be provided.

 

 


Careful collection and disposal of used oil.
Properly designed vehicle and plant washing facilities.
Washing in rivers and open areas to be prohibited.
Repair works to be carried in designated workshops and not on roadside.


Interference with the flow of River Runguti


Provision of sluice gates and spillways to ensure continuous flow is enhanced


Soil erosion and siltation


Establishment of tree nurseries.
Silt traps should be put in place.
De-silting of the silt traps should be done regularly.


 


Protection of steep cuttings should be done by landscaping and to some extend building of gabions where necessary.


 


Terracing also should be done to reduce the velocity of water flow and hence reduced erosion.
Planting of vegetation like grass, trees and shrubs in the disfigured environment.
The catchment should be conserved by planting of woodlands and other relevant flora.

 

Pollution from agrochemicals


Proper training on application of agrochemicals.
Use of natural fertilizers.
Practicing organic farming.


Insecurity


Setting up of an effective internal security unit to work in liaison with the police and administration.
The construction camp should be well secured and patrolled at all times.
Provide fire prevention installations and alarm in the compound.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Tharaka Nithi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413726         National Environment Management Authority.

