
				Page: 1340GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3921
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED REALIGNMENT OF THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY (SGR) WITHIN NAIROBI NATIONAL PARK, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Kenya Railways Corporation, is proposing a realignment of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) within Nairobi National Park, Nairobi County.
The Project involves the line construction at mileage range DK455+650 - DK464+500 within Nairobi National Park and with total length of 8.85km, including the construction of subgrade, culverts and bridge engineering, The SGR will be a single track railway with a track gauge of 1435mm, with design speed of 120Km/h for passenger train and 80Km for freight transport. The rail track will be made of ballast with internal combustion traction category with reserved conditions for future electrification.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental Impact 


Proposed Mitigation Measures 


Loss of wildlife habitat and habitat fragmentation
 


Restrict vegetation clearance to only the working area of 130m.
Where possible avoid cutting down the indigenous trees within the 130m but out of the actual rail route.
Compensate for lost vegetation through landscaping with suitable indigenous plants.
KWS and KRC to compensate lost wildlife habitat by identifying a parcel of land suitable for wildlife conservation and acquiring it for that purpose.


Potential increase in poaching
 


Sensitize all persons involved in the SGR construction work within the national park area on the importance of conservation and that they should not engage in illegal activities within the Park.
Prepare and provide conservation awareness materials in the project site. This to include large posters with information on conservation, procedures to be followed when operating in a protected area, park rules and regulations.
Provide information on the legal implication of anyone found dealing wildlife products.
Enhance KWS security patrols in the area.


Human wildlife conflicts
 


Sensitize all personnel working on the project on park rules and regulations.
Ensure a new electric fence is constructed connecting the two fences before demolishing sections of the existing eastern boundary fence.
Enhance KWS problem animal control efforts.
KWS Nairobi National Park management to provide a hotline for reporting HWC incidents.


Fire risk
 


Sensitize the workers on park rules and regulations.
Provide fire extinguishers in the working area and or provide emergency numbers for the Nairobi fire brigades.


Land and soil degradation
 


Avoid unnecessary movement of soil materials from the site and provide soil conservation structures on the areas prone to soil erosion mostly to reduce impact by the surface run-off
Depending on the period, monitor construction activities for appropriate and effective control measures of erosion e.g. during rainy / wet conditions, ensure suitable barriers on potential water erosion paths.
Conduct standard landscaping after project completion i.e. resurface (pave) open areas after the completion of the project and introduce suitable (indigenous plants) and well-managed vegetation to generate surface covers on the open areas; to control soil movement by erosion agents. Grasses found in the area like Pennisetum mezianum, Themeda triandra, Digitaria scalarum and Sporobolus pyramidalis
Ensure suitable storm water drainage channels. Such channels need to be regularly maintained and repaired to avoid point discharges which have pronounced effect on soil erosion in case of breakages or blockages.
Restrict operation in the 130m land use area.


Air pollution
 


Provide personal protective equipment, materials and clothing such as nose masks and goggles to workers during construction.
Ensure regular and prompt maintenance of construction machinery and equipment. This will minimize generation of hazardous gases and other suspended particulate matter.
Sprinkle water in areas being excavated and along the tracks used by the transport trucks within the site.
Use environmentally friendly fuels such as unleaded gasoline.
Ensure that vehicles drive only on designated roads/driveways (avoid off road driving as much as is possible). Vehicles transporting construction materials to the site move at the recommended park speed of 40Km/hr.


Noise pollution
 


Construction works should be carried out only during the specified time i.e. from 0700 hours to 1800 hours on the section that is within the NNP.
Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery when not in use.
Machineries should be maintained regularly to reduce noise.
There should be no unnecessary hooting of the involved machinery and vehicles.
Workers should be provided with relevant personal protective equipment (PPE).
Observe the provisions of the Environmental Management and Coordination (Noise and Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control) Regulations, 2009.


Solid waste disposal
 


Generated waste should be handled and disposed through sound waste management strategies as per the prevailing regulatory provisions in the Environmental Management and Coordination (Waste Management) Regulations, 2006.
During all the project phases waste should be properly segregated to encourage recycling of some useful waste materials; i.e. some stone and concrete materials remains can be used as backfills. This calls for source reduction, recycling and reuse.
During the operation phase sensitize the railway users on waste management and provide waste receptacles at designated points like terminals and in the passenger and freight locomotives for use while on transit.


Oil leaks and spills
 


Ensure use of serviceable machinery.
Maintenance services should be carried out in known designated service bays more suitably outside the project area.
All oil products and materials should be stored in the site store and should be handled appropriately to avoid spills and leaks.


Visual intrusion
 


On completion the worked area should be restored through proper landscaping and planting of more vegetation so as to blend with existing environment.
All solid waste and debris of spoil material from construction activities must be collected upon completion.


Occupational safety and health
 


All workers should be provided with Appropriate personal protective gear. These include working overalls, helmets, goggles, earmuffs, masks, and gloves among others.
The requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2007, the Building Code and other relevant regulations should be strictly adhered to.
A first aid kit(s) should be provided within the site and it should be fully equipped at all times during construction.
At least one person in the workforce should be trained in administering first aid.
The contractor should not expose workers to stress inducing factors.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413860         National Environment Management Authority.

