
				Page: 1335GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3547
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT LOCATED IN RUNDA AREA ON PLOT NUMBER L.R. NO. 20091, OFF KIAMBU ROAD, NEXT TO GITHOGORO SLUM IN NAIROBI CITY COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Runda Gardens Development Limited, is proposing to construct a Mixed Use Development on Land Title No. 20091 along Kwaheri Road, off Kiambu Road, next to Githogoro slum in Nairobi County. The project plot area measures about 30 Acres. The project will entail putting up a multiple use premise; a residential component of about 21 Acres on which a total of 121 residential units of maisonettes will be constructed, a school component of about 7 Acres and a community centre component and associated facilities like parking bays in the remaining portion of the plot. The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures

Expected Negative Impacts


 Recommended Mitigation Measures


Project implementation disputes


Sufficient planning for adequate resources required i.e. financial, personnel and equipment.
Land transfer agreements should be formalized before the project starts as per the laws of the land.
Community support mobilization and sensitization through consultative forums.

 
 

Increased storm water, runoff and soil erosion


Storm water to be harvested and recycled for utilization within the project site. Disposal of storm water that will not be harvested will be via surface drain off.


 


Apply soil erosion control measures such as leveling of the project site to reduce run-off velocity and rip any compacted areas.


 


Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roads to avoid soil compaction within the project site.

 

High Demand of Raw material


Source building materials from local suppliers who use environmentally friendly processes in their operations.
Ensure accurate budgeting and estimation of actual construction material requirements to ensure that the least amount of material necessary is ordered.
Ensure that damage or loss of materials at the construction site is kept minimal through proper storage.
Use at least 5%-10% recycled, refurbished or salvaged materials to reduce the use of raw materials and divert material from landfills.

 
 
 

Vegetation disturbance


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area.
Specify locations for trailers and equipment, and areas of the site which should be kept free of traffic, equipment, and storage.
Designate access routes and parking within the site.
Design and implement an appropriate landscaping programme to help in re-vegetation of part of the project area after construction.

 
 
 

Increased solid waste generation


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. through a hierarchy of options: 1. Source reduction 2. Recycling 3.Composting and reuse 4. Combustion 5. Sanitary land filling.
Order materials in the sizes and quantities they will be needed rather than cutting them to size, or having large quantities of residual materials.
Use of durable, long-lasting materials that will not need to be replaced as often and those that can stay unused over time, thereby reducing the amount of construction waste generated over time.
Provide facilities for proper handling and storage of construction materials to reduce the amount of waste caused by damage or exposure to the elements.
Use construction materials that have minimal or no packaging and those containing recycled content to avoid the generation of excessive waste.
Private waste disposal company to be contracted to transport and dispose the solid waste from site.

 
 
 
 
 

Dust emission


Ensure strict enforcement of on-site speed limit regulations.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary to reduce dust generation by construction vehicles.
Personal Protective equipment to be worn always when at work place.

 
 

Exhaust emission


Vehicle idling time shall be minimized and engines running at loading/offloading points and parking areas switched off.
Fuelled construction equipment shall be used where feasible equipment shall be properly tuned and maintained.

 

Noise and vibration


Sensitize construction vehicle drivers and machinery operators to switch off engines of vehicles or machinery not being used and to avoid hooting especially in sensitive areas.
Ensure that construction machinery are kept in good condition to reduce noise generation and are insulated or placed in enclosures.
Comply with the provisions of Noise Prevention and Control Rules 2005, Legal notice no. 24 regarding noise limits at the workplace.

 
 

Increased energy consumption


Ensure electrical equipment, appliances, lights, and vehicles are switched off when not being used.
Install energy saving fluorescent tubes at all lighting points instead of bulbs which consume higher electric energy.

 

High water demand


Install water conserving taps that turn-off automatically when water is not being used.
Promptly detect and repair water pipe and tank leaks.
Sensitize staff to conserve water.

 
 

Generation of wastewater


Ensure that the effluent generated is monitored for its quality should meet the stipulated standards and it’s directed to the existing sewerage treatment plant.
Conduct regular checks for pipe blockages or damages.

 

Incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences.


Ensure that provisions for reporting incidents, accidents and dangerous occurrences during construction are in place.
Enforcing adherence to safety procedures and preparing contingency plan for accident response in addition safety education and training shall be emphasized.

 

Emergency preparedness and evacuation procedures


Design suitable documented emergency preparedness and evacuation procedures that must be tested at regular intervals, to be used during any emergency.
Ensure that adequate provisions are in place to immediately stop any operations where there in an imminent and serious danger to health and safety and to evacuate workers.
Ensure that emergency telephone numbers posters are prominently and strategically displayed within the construction site.

 
 

First Aid


Train workers in first aid by a recognized body.
Well stocked first aid box which is easily available and accessible, should be provided within the premises.

 

Increased Pressure on Infrastructure


Upgrade existing infrastructure and services, where feasible.
Ensure the general safety and security at all times by providing day and night security guards and adequate lighting within and around the construction site.

 

Insecurity


Body-search the workers on entry, to avoid getting weapons on site, and leaving site to ensure nothing is stolen.
Ensure only authorised personnel get to the site.
Security alarms will be installed.

 
 
The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30521, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/7413618         National Environment Management Authority.

