
				Page: 1037GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 2998
THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
(No. 14 of 2003)
PUBLIC NOTICE TO ISSUE APPROPRIATE ADJUSTMENT ORDER(S) TO PROPRIETOR(S)/OWNER(S) OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE BUILDINGS OF PRIVATE NATURE, BUILT ENVIRONMENT, OPERATORS OF PUBLIC VEHICLES AND PROVIDERS OF ANY SERVICES OR AMENITIES ORDINARILY PROVIDED TO MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 21, 22, 23, 24 AND 26 OF THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT NO. 14 OF 2003 CHAPTER 133 LAWS OF KENYA (THE ACT)
Statutory Mandate and Functions of the National Council for Persons With Disabilities
The National Council for Persons with Disabilities is a State Corporation established by the Persons with Disabilities Act No. 14 of 2003 on 31st December, 2003 .The Council was operationalized by Legal Notice Number 64 of 16th June, 2004.
The council is managed by a board of non-executive directors who are responsible for strategic policy formulation and direction and a Secretariat headed by the Chief Executive Officer.
The council is a high level inclusive policy, legislative, regulatory, implementing and programming oversight agency under the Ministry of Labour Social Security and Services.
The functions of the council include, to:
Promote, protect and uphold the rights, habilitation and rehabilitation of Persons with Disabilities within their Communities and the society.
Co-operate  with the national  government during national census  and register persons with disabilities on a continuous basis  to ensure  that accurate figures of persons with disabilities are obtained in the Country for purposes of planning, development and service delivery.
Develop and Implement inclusive polices, legislations, regulations, and programmes on education, employment, health, accessibility, transport, sports and recreation, communication culture, and in all other aspects of social-economic life on the rights of persons with different categories of disabilities.
Conduct accessibility audits  and usability of built environment.
Issue appropriate adjustment orders to owners of public and private buildings, services or amenities to secure and ensure access by persons with disabilities to the premises, services or amenities concerned.
Achieve equalization of opportunities for persons with disabilities and prevent discrimination against  them.
Register institutions, associations, places  and disabled persons organizations, including those that are controlled and managed by government, that provide services for the rehabilitation and welfare of persons with disabilities.
Advise on the provisions of any international treaty or agreement relating to the welfare or rehabilitation of persons with disabilities and the benefits of such treaty or agreement to Kenya.
Disability mainstreaming of public and private institutions.
10. Provide assistive devices, implements, sunscreen lotions, assistant to students with disabilities in the form of scholarships, loan programmes, fee subsidies and other similar forms of assistance in both public and private institutions.
11. Support vulnerable households caring for persons with severe disabilities who are duly registered with the council.
12. Enhance awareness raising on persons with disabilities and activities of the council.
13. Process in consultation with Kenya Revenue Authority income tax and any other levies exemptions on income, materials, articles and equipment, including motor vehicles  and any government levies which would in any way increase costs to the disadvantage of persons with disabilities.
14. Engage or make other arrangements with any other person to carry out research on, or supply information on any matter relating to the welfare and habilitation and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities.
In order to effectively implement the provisions of the persons with disabilities Act, and give greater effect to the Constitution, 2010, the United Nations Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities, the council implements the following pieces of subsidiary legislations and standards:
(a) The Persons with Disabilities (Access to Employment, Services and Facilities) Regulations, 2009.
(b) The Persons with Disabilities (Cost Care, Support and Maintenance) Regulations, 2009.
(c)  The Persons with Disabilities (Registration) Regulations, 2009.
(d) The Persons with Disabilities (Income Tax Deductions and Exemptions) Order, 2010.
(e)  The Persons with Disabilities (National Development Fund for Persons with Disabilities) (Conduct of Business and Affairs of the Board of Trustees) Regulations, 2009.
(f)   The Kenyan Standard, KS ISO 21542;”Building Construction-Accessibility and Usability of built environment”. The standard provides building users, policy makers and legislators with requirements and recommendations to create a sustainable built environment which is accessible.
The council’s vision, mission and values
The council is committed to upholding the following vision, mission and core values for its operations.
Vision
An institution of excellence responsive to disability human rights protection and mainstreaming in development.
Mission
To mainstream disability issues in all aspects of social-cultural, economic and political development.
Core values
Inclusivity, social justice, human dignity, equality, equity, integrity, transparency, accountability and good governance in implementing the Persons with Disabilities Act and other laws on disability.
Public Notice
Under sections 21, 22, 23, 24 and 26 of the persons with disabilities act no. 14 of 2003 chapter 133   laws of Kenya.
Under sections 21, 22, 23, 24 and 26 of the Act, there is a legal duty on proprietors/owners of public and private buildings of private nature, built environment, operators of public vehicles and providers of any services or amenities ordinarily provided to members of the general to adjust the same to accommodate various categories of persons with disabilities.
Pursuant to the said sections of the Act, the grace period upon which such proprietors/owners of public and private buildings of private nature, built environment, operators of public vehicles and providers of any services or amenities ordinarily provided to members of the general public were required by law to have adjusted their built environment, services or amenities and fully complied with the Act lapsed in December, 2014.
Section 26 of the Act
Offences on adjustment order and discrimination
FURTHER, failure to make such public and private buildings of private nature, built environment, operators of public vehicles and providers of any services or amenities ordinarily provided to members of the public disability compliant amounts to commission of offence(s) and discrimination targeting persons with disabilities in terms of section 26 of the Act.
Forty Five (45) Days Compliance Notice
It is in view of the above that the Council now requires proprietors/ owners of public and private buildings of private nature, built environment, operators of public vehicles and providers of any services or amenities ordinarily provided to members of the general public to submit to the  council within forty five (45) days from the date of this notice, their complete and comprehensive adjusted/re-adjusted  built environment plans that allow persons with disabilities to carry out their duties without being at a disadvantaged position compared to persons without disabilities.
Further take notice that failure or refusal to comply with this notice and sections 21, 22, 23, 24 and 26 of the Act, shall be a proper legal basis for the Council to issue and confirm appropriate adjustment orders against the proprietors/owners of public and private buildings of private nature, built environment, operators of public vehicles and providers of any services or amenities ordinarily provided to members of the general public.
For more information, contact.
MOHAMMED H. GABBOW,
the Executive Director,
National Council for Persons with Disabilities,
Opposite ABC Place, along Waiyaki Way,
or Mt. View Estate plot 195, Nairobi,
P.O. Box 66577–00800, Nairobi.
E-mail=ncpwds@africaonline.co.ke
MR/7407110                                      Website: www.ncpwd.go.ke

