
				Page: 1046GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3001
THE WATER ACT
(No. 8 of 2002, section 107)
PUBLIC CONSULTATION ON REGULAR TARIFF FOR AMATSI WATER SERVICES COMPANY LIMITED
NOTICE is given to the general public in the area of Lake Victoria North Water Services Board, which has a license to provide water services in the counties of Kakamega, Vihiga, Busia, Bungoma, Trans Nzoia, Uasin Gishu, Parts of Elgeyo Marakwet and Nandi counties, that it has applied to the Water Services Regulatory Board for a tariff review for its agent, Amatis Water Services Company for the period 2015/2016 to 2017/2018.  The Amatsi Water Services Company serves, within Vihiga County, parts of Maseno and Luanda towns and their environs (Maseno water supply), Vihiga and Majengo towns and their environs (Vihiga water supply), Gambogi and Kiboswa towns and their environs (Sosiani water supply), Mbale and Chavakali towns and their environs (Mbale water supply), Kaimosi, Cheptulu, Shamakhokho/Mago towns and their environs (Kaimosi water supply).
Lake Victoria North Water Services Board proposes an upward tariff review to enable Amatis Water Services Company to attain, in the short term, full operation and maintenance (O&M) cost recovery, undertake minor investments and meet conditions for improving water service delivery to customers.
Lake Victoria North Water Services Board proposes to adopt rising block tariffs for all consumer categories except water kiosks.
Details of the current tariff and the proposed tariff can be obtained from www.lvnwsb.go.ke or at the offices of Amatsi Water Services Company located at Mbale Town, Maji House Building next to Vihiga County Headquarters.
Written comments on the proposed tariff review should be addressed to the Managing Director, Amatsi Water Services Company, P.O. Box 740–50300, Maragoli or amatsiwaterco@gmail.co, or info@ lvnwsb.go.ke.
The closing date for such comments shall be on the 25th May, 2015.
A public consultation meeting shall be held on 21st Ma,y 2015 at Mutembe Friends Church, Mbale town, Vihiga County starting at 9.30 a.m.
Dated the 20th April, 2015.
GEORGE KWEDHO,
Chief Executive Officer,
MR/7407130 Lake Victoria North Water Services Board (LVNWSB).

