
				Page: 3453GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 9291
THE KENYA INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS ACT
(Cap.  411A)
POLICY GUIDELINES ON DIGITAL TRANSITION PERIOD
IT IS notified for information for the general public that the Cabinet Secretary for Information, Communications and Technology has issued the policy guidelines set out in the Schedule hereto, and has duly notified the contents thereof to the Communications Authority of Kenya, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5A of the Kenya Information and Communications Act, Cap. 411A.
FORWARD
In line with the Kenya’s preparations to comply with the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) deadline of the 17th June, 2015 for GEO6 Agreement to migrate from analogue to digital terrestrial broadcasting, the Government has adopted a phased analogue switch-off strategy which will result in different regions being switched off on different dates in tandem with the rollout of the digital signal for efficient and effective transition.
ANALOGUE SWITCH-OFF DATES
All persons providing terrestrial television broadcasting services shall be required to migrate from the provision of such services on the analogue platform to the provision thereof in the digital platform according to the following Schedule –
SCHEDULE

Phase


Region


Analogue Switch off Dates


Phase I


Nairobi Region which  comprises Nairobi, Kiambu, Kajiado, Murang’a, Athi Rier, Kitengela


On or before 31st day of December, 2014


Phase II


Mombasa, Malindi, Nyeri, Meru, Kisumu, Webuye, Kakamega, Kisii, Nakuru, Eldoret, Nyahururu, Machakos, Narok and Londiani (Rongai) regions


On or before 2nd day of February, 2015


Phase III


Garissa, Kitui, Lodwar, Lokichogio, Kapenguria, Kabarnet, Migori, Voi (Vuria), Mbwinzau/Kibwezi, Namanga and All Other Remaining Sites

On or before 30th day of March, 2015
2.  The Communications Authority of Kenya shall ensure that each person providing television broadcasting services in these regions using the analogue broadcast signal switches off the signal of its existing television channel or channels on or before the date stated hereinbefore.
After the switch-over date hereinbefore, there shall be no analogue TV transmissions in the said regions.
Dated the 2nd December, 2014.
FRED MATIANG’I,
Cabinet Secretary,
Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology.

