
				Page: 3453GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 9290
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
INTRODUCTION OF THE GOVERNMENT SERVICES DIGITAL PAYMENTS PROGRAMME
IT IS notified for information of the general public that pursuant to the principle of openness and accountability stipulated in article 201 (a) of the Constitution of Kenya, guiding Public Finance Management and article 6 (3) of the Constitution of Kenya, providing for the widest possible access to government services, the Government of the Republic of Kenya has developed the eCitizen.go.ke Digital Payments Platform through which citizens and all persons will be able to pay for government services. This Digital Payments platform is integrated with all available electronic payment platforms in Kenya, including mobile telephone money payment services.
The details of the Digital Payment Platform are as follows:
(i)    The eCitizen.go.ke is a wholly owned domain and portal of the Government of Kenya;
(ii) The eCitizen.go.ke is the official Government Digital Payments Platform;
(iii)  All Government services shall progressively be made available through eCitizen.go.ke;
(iv)  The unique identifier for individuals is the National Idendity Card for Citizens;
(v)   The unique Identifier for foreigners is the Alien Identity Card;
(vi)  The unique identifier for companies, institutions and organizations shall be the official registration number;
(vii) The Official Government of Kenya Pay bill number is 206206;
(viii)   The Official Government of Kenya Short Code number is 22206;
(ix)  The Official Government of Kenya USSD Number is 206;
(x)   The eCitizen.go. ke shall charge a nominal administrative fee per transaction, which shall be a pro-rated percentage of the payment made.
The public is advised to visit www.eCitizen.go.ke to view the list of services for which payment can be made digitally. The Government shall also disseminate this information through the electronic and print media.
Dated the 23rd December, 2014.
H. K. Rotich,
Cabinet Secretary, National Treasury

