
				Page: 235Gazette Notice No. 721
THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
THE NATIONAL LAND COMMISSION ACT
(No. 5 of 2012)
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT
(No. 17 of 2012)
TASKFORCE TO INQUIRE INTO ISSUES PERTAINING TO TRUST AND OTHER COUNTY PUBLIC LAND IN KITUI COUNTY
Appointment
PURSUANT to the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, the National Land Commission Act, 2012 and the County Governments Act, 2012; the Governor, Kitui County appoints a Task Force to inquire into issues pertaining to Trust and other County Public Land in Kitui County consisting of the following:
MEMBERS OF THE TASKFORCE (TEAM I)
Nzuki Mwinzi (Dr.)—(Chairman)
Susan Mutungi—(Vice-Chairman)
Members:
Daniel K. Musili
Josphat C. Munyambu
Zipporah Manandu
Esther N. Kamwaki
Richard M. Muli
Gideon Elijah Mbiti Muasya
Lillian Kalunda
Ibrahim Shabaan
Joel T. Katolo
Francis Kithae
Henry I. Kiema
Michael Musili
Fastina Mwende Salu
Edward K. Mwendwa
Joint Secretaries:
Jeniffer Mwangangi
Titus Masila
MEMBERS OF THE TASKFORCE (TEAM II)
Job Mwangangi—(Chairman)
Teresa N. Muthui—(Vice-Chairman)
Members:
Kyalo Kingoo
Frank N. Nzioka
Ruth K. Mulandi
Joel Musembi
Martha Kiema
Dominic Muthui
Kiema Kimoli
Kioko Ngau
Esther Mueni Musau
Musili Kimanzi
Benson Mutemi
Jeniffer Nyamu
Christopher Nzili
Joint Secretaries:
Judith Musyoka
Christopher Kitonga
Mandate
The mandate of the Taskforce is to inquire into issues pertaining to Trust and other County Public land in Kitui County.
The Terms of Reference (TOR) of the taskforce are to—
(a) to review literature on relevant laws, past land reports and policies to inform the work and recommendations of the task force;
(b) to audit and ascertain the current legal ownership status of the land in the specified areas including allottees, date of allocation, permitted land use, respective acreages, allocation procedures used and the allocating authorities;
(c)  to prepare an inventory of the specified trust and other county public land to ascertain its current status with regard to its alienation and make appropriate recommendations on how to secure, protect and preserve the land;
(d) to establish whether any land allocations done after the promulgation of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 observed the pertinent constitutional principles and legal requirements, including public participation and sustainable development;
(e)  to identify and evaluate the origin, nature and possible solutions to prevailing land disputes and contentious issues; and propose appropriate recommendations on administrative, management and other measures that can be instituted to prevent recurrence of such problems in the future;
(f)   to prepare and computerize comprehensive data and information on all leased land in Kitui Town, Mwingi Town, ward headquarters, and in all medium urban areas and market centres where trade, commercial, industrial businesses are transacted;
(g) to propose and justify possible land use and management options that may be considered to enhance the productivity and sustainable use of the land;
(h) to prepare a well written, structured and quality concept note, interim and final report with the availed resources and within the specified timeframes.
Areas on inquiry
(1) Team One (1) shall Inquire into the following areas  of Kitui County:
(i)       Manyenyoni Trust Land,
(ii)     Kanyonyoo-Katoteni (Yatta 2),
(iii)    Agricultural Land at Voo,
(iv)    Mwakini and Kwa Mutonga Settlement Belt,
(v)     Nzalae Group Ranch,
(vi)    County and Public Land at Kwa-Vonza and Environs
(vii)  Kiongwe—Ngai Ndethya Area,
(viii) Nziu Ranch
(2) Team Two (2) shall Inquire into the following areas of Kitui County:
(i)       Kalalani and Kandolongwe Trust Land bordering Tsavo East National Park,
(ii)     Mwingi North Game Reserve,
(iii)    Nzambani Rock Area,
(iv)    Wikithuki Settlement Scheme,
(v)     County Land adjoining the Kitui Prisons,
(vi)    County Land adjoining prison Land in Waita,
(vii)  County Land Adjoining Mwingi Level IV Hospital,
(viii) Ngaaie Community Land,
(ix)    Mathima and Kanziku area.
In the performance of its functions, the Taskforce will have all the powers necessary to—
(a) review reports and literature that may inform it on its mandate;
(b) hold public hearings within the Kitui County and at such other places as it shall deem necessary for proper discharge of its mandate;
(c)  hold private hearings whenever it becomes necessary to instil confidence in the people appearing before the taskforce to allay their fears of adversity or reprisals;
(d) receive written memoranda from individuals and groups on all issues relevant to its mandate,
(e)  have access to all reports and documents necessary for the effective discharge of its mandate;
(f)   to summon any one person, entity or institution deemed to hold relevant information in the course of this inquiry;
(g) to seek clarification from any authority in line with the mandate.
5     The Task Force shall undertake and complete the assignment within a period of five (5) months effective 1st October, 2014 to 28th February, 2015.
The Task Force shall prepare and submit to a joint Committee constituted by the Governor, comprising County Executive Committee Members and officials of the National Land Commission and/or Kitui County Land Management Board (KCLMB) comprehensive work plan(s) and concept notes including clear interpretation of the Terms of Reference for approval within two weeks of its appointment.
The Task Force shall submit an Interim Report by 18th December, 2014, and a Final Report on its findings and recommendations to the appointing authority and the National Land Commission and/or Kitui County Land Management Board (KCLMB) not later than 28th February, 2015 for consideration and joint implementation in accordance with the relevant land and other laws.
Subject to remuneration terms communicated under a separate cover, the Task Force teams shall hold such number of meetings in such places and at such times as they may consider necessary for the proper discharge of their functions and shall regulate their own procedures.
The Task Force teams may, subject to approval by the appointing authority, split into smaller groups or organize themselves in other appropriate ways to enable them undertake the work expeditiously.
Dated the 28th January, 2015.
JULIUS M. MALOMBE,
Governor, Kitui County.

