
				Page: 1375GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3471
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF A SERVICE STATION, ON PLOT LR NO 29C IN MATILIKU OFF EMALI – MATILIKU ROAD, MAKUENI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kingsent Petroleum Kenya Limited) is proposing to construct a Service Station on land parcel No 29C Matiliku off Emali – Matiliku Road, Makueni County
The design will involve a steel canopy, ribbed concrete finish under the steel canopy, one pump isles, four underground fuel tanks (5000liters diesel tank, 5000liters kerosene, 2x5000liters super petrol), sanitary facilities for both genders, septic tank, a store, station manager and sales office section, compressor and generator section and underground drained system.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Noise and vibrations


Barricading the area (erecting a boundary wall.
Construction activities to be conducted during the day.
Provision of appropriate Personal Protective equipment to protect workers from occupational noise.
Regular maintenance of plants and equipment.
Shutting down of engine vehicles when not in use to reduce on noise levels.
Conducting of noise measurements from different positions within and outside the workplace to establish prevailing noise levels and recommending appropriate mitigation measures.


Air pollution


Use of dump method to mitigate on dust by sprinkling water on areas to be excavated.
Soil compaction.


Pressure on existing infrastructure


Erection of warning and informative signs. i.e. notices, bill boards at the site during the construction phase and traffic control along the connecting road. 


Solid and liquid waste


Proper designing of drainage channels and regular maintenance of the same.


Contamination of the ground with oil and grease substances


Maintenance should be carried out at designated service bays to avoid contamination of environment by resultant oil and greases.


Oil leaks and spills


Regular inspection of underground tanks for leakages.
Construction of a three pit oil interceptor tanks to separate oil from sludge.
Double walling of underground tanks to guard against leaks.
Protecting the underground tanks with corrosion prevention materials.
Prioritizing the upgrade of equipment and installation of existing facilities of a network after a defined age.
Careful siting of the project to ensure that it lies in an environment that is far from environmental receptors including sewers, tunnels, vaults, surface water reservoirs etc.


Destruction of soil structure


Ensure use of manual labour and hand tools where appropriate.
Ensure the contractor takes the shortest time possible.


Soil and ground water contamination


Regular hydraulic pressure testing of the underground tanks.
Non destructive testing, for example, ultrasound testing.


Generation of contaminated waste water and storm water


Minimization of volume of storm water generated from vehicle fueling stations and AST containment areas through installation of roofs or other types of covers.
Implementation of secondary containment procedures that avoid accidental or intentional releases of contaminated containment fluids.
Segregation of clean drainage and potentially contaminated drainage, treating the latter through oil/water separators. Oil water separators may include baffle type or coalescing plate type. They should be properly designed, operated, and maintained to achieve the desired water treatment results.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Makueni County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/5021532              National Environment Management Authority.

