
				Page: 1377GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3473
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED LPG STORAGEAND BOTTLING FACILITY ON PLOT L.R. KISUMU/KOGONY/4813 IN WINAM DIVISION, KISUMU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Green Energy Limited) proposes to construct an LPG Bulk Storage and Filling Plant for the storage of cooking gas and filling cylinders located in Bandani Sub-Location, Kisumu Town Location, Winam Division, Kisumu East District, Kisumu County.
The design will involve installation of one aboveground 60 Metric Ton Capacity tank,off-loading and loading pumps and compressors, LPG cylinder filling, a 100,000L horizontal diesel tank, paving of all driveways, installation of one 80-tonne platform weighbridge, office block, a genset house, fire fighting system, a borehole,  LPG tank containment, appropriate drainage channels and lines and access road.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Mitigation Measure


Noise pollution


Noise reduction/ hearing protection devices when working with noisy equipment.
Use serviceable equipment with low noise emission.
Instruct truck and machinery operators to avoid raving of engine.


Air pollution (dust, fuel emissions)


Control speed of construction vehicles;
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Water shall be sprayed during the construction phase on excavated areas to reduce dust emission.
Regular maintenance of plant and equipment.
Provision of dust masks for use while working- in dusty conditions.
Use of serviceable vehicles and machinery to avoid excessive smoke emission.


Solid waste Management
 
 
 


Provide solid waste collection facility for the temporary storage of waste prior to disposal.
The storage yards should be provided with solid waste disposal facilities such as waste bins/chutes.
Excavation activities to be done preferably during the dry season to avoid soil erosion.


Soil Erosion
 
 


Soils excavated for the construction of the LPG facility shall be disposed offsite or used for backfilling where possible.
Soils shall not be left exposed to wind/water for long.
Existing vegetation shall be minimally disturbed during the construction.
Reduction of soil erosion and safeguard biodiversity protection.


Gasleak/fire
 
 
 
 
 


Re-plant degraded areas with local species to improve ground cover.
Install Mounded LPG Tanks and include the use of fireproof electrical installations at the facility.
Install adequate fire fighting installations and provision for adequate water storage.
Provide emergency stop switch around the facility will be done at appropriate locations to facilitate the cutting off of power in case of emergency.
Installation of Gas Detectors.
Provide a "First Aid Box", with proper equipment with proper training of Depot staff on how to administer first aid.
Address the depot fire prevention and control capacity.
Install Fire alarms, smoke detectors, etc. for fire warning and prevention in addition to other fire control equipment besides the fire extinguishers and sand buckets - so as to strengthen the fire control capacity.
Staff training and regular drills on fire prevention and control will be encouraged to ensure proper preparedness for fire control in the depot.
The fire control equipment will be regularly serviced after installation to ensure efficient performance when required.


Ground contamination


Maintenance should be carried out at designated service bays to avoid contamination of environment by resultant oil and greases.


Site area and groundwater pollution
 
 
 
 
 


No domestic or any other hazardous waste is disposed of at the project area.
Ensure that machinery and used oil from vehicles is not released to the ground through the provision of mode of collection and appropriate disposal.
Clear instruction to machine and vehicle servicing personnel on this provision to be made available.
Construct a drainage system within and around the depot site leading to an interceptor.
Carry out regular drainage and interceptor maintenance including cleaning the interceptors of rubbish to avoid clogging and overflow.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kisumu County
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/4766863              National Environment Management Authority.

