
				Page: 1374GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3470
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED FERTILIZER MANUFACTURING PLANT ON PLOT L.R. NO.  NO. BLOCK 6/11, NAKURU MUNICIPALITY, NAKURU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Fertiplant East Africa Limited) proposes to construct a factory for the granulation process of Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium (NPK) fertilizer.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact 


Mitigation Measures 


Haphazard storage of building materials.


Provide pathways
Reduce heaps of materials from project site
Keep materials in open where they can be spotted quickly


Injuries caused by heavy materials fall


Ensure cranes are well maintained.
Pulleys to be greased.
The rope and table be strong and safe.
Platforms should be constructed strongly and avoid their surfaces being slippery.
Load reduction to size/weight manageable
Train workers on ergonomic principles of managing heavy loads.


Traffic accidents


Signboards should be in large letters and be noticeable.
Provision should be made of good points of vehicle turning in the construction site.
Only trained and skilful and licensed drivers should be engaged in driving vehicles carrying materials to the site.
Drunkardness be forbidden to all drivers.
All vehicles be maintained.
First aid facilities be availed in the site of construction.


Fire outbreaks


The construction site should have fire fighting equipment including:-
-      fire hydrant
-      fire extinguishers
-      hose reel
-      sand buckets
Where possible the management to have their own engine or be able to quickly access MCN engine in case of fire outbreaks.
All workers be trained on the skills to fight fire out breaks.
Fire drills be conducted.


Falling walls, columns, beams and slabs


All specialized works to be carried out by skilled people and supervised by senior technical staff.
Allow good period (21days) of curing for slabs.


Accidents


Train workers on ergonomic principles of heavy physical work. Maintain a natural drainage system as much as possible or reconstruct the site to create the same.
Maintain the drainage system impervious and self-flowing.
Where open yards are not cemented grass should be planted to absorb rainwater.
Sharps to be handled by skilled workers.
Sharps not to be positioned on pathways.
Sharps be positioned at distances to allow work space.


Paint vapours


Keep containers containing these substances tightly all the time.
Use of masks during finishing operations
Skilled people to handle these substances.
Avoid cigarette smoking


Solid waste generation  


Provision and use of solid waste container
Collection, transportation and disposal of the wastes
Carry out solid waste segregation to reduce the bulk of waste disposed off.
Determine stages of more waste generation and institute control measures.
Determine hazardous wastes to be given more attention for storage and collection i.e. more frequency of collection.


Open spaces on upper floors.


Educate workers on the risks involved on the upper floors construction. eH\Edu


Falling heavy objects


Avoid storing heavy material on the upper floors and along the stairs.


Weak/slippery ladders


Educate workers on the use of ladders.
Maintenance of ladders.


Scarfolding


Regular check ups and Maintenance


Dust emission


Use of water sprays to suppress dust.


Extreme weather


Use of warm clothing for cold climate
Use of light clothing for hot climate.


Oil and paints spillages


Scoop all the spilled oils and paints.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nakuru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/4766615              National Environment Management Authority.

