
				Page: 1369GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3466
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED REHABILITATION AND AUGMENTATION OF HOMA BAY SEWERAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM IN HOMA BAY COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II) proposes to set up a Rehabilitation and Augmentation Sewerage Treatment System in Homa Bay County.
The whole process shall dwell on rehabilitation and augmentation measures for the existing Waste water treatment system which comprises of rehabilitation and augmentation of preliminary treatment unit for screening and grit removal, construction of anaerobic ponds, rehabilitation and augmentation of the existing settling tanks and maturation ponds.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Soil and water contamination


Plan emergency response measures in case of accidental oil spills.
Regular servicing and maintenance of construction equipments to avoid oil spills.
At the end of construction works, level off the soils and facilitate vegetation regeneration.
Ensure protection of the local ecosystem by ensuring liquid and hazardous wastes do not find their way into storm drains.
Ensure proper maintenance of drainage system like regular cleaning to ensure smooth flow of the storm water and avoid blockages and overflows especially during rainy seasons.


Odour, dust and noise pollution


Ensure proper operation and maintenance practices of the waste stabilization ponds.
Provide protective clothing like helmets, dust masks and hardy gumboots to the construction crew.
Maintain vehicles and construction machinery in good working condition in order to minimize gas emissions and noise.
The contractor to regulate night time construction when noise is loudest.
Construction sites and transportation routes to be water-sprayed on dry and windy days up to three times a day, especially if these sites are near sensitive receptors, such as residential areas.


Solid waste and liquid waste generation


Unusable construction waste, such as damaged pipes, formwork and other construction material, must be disposed off at an approved dumpsite or sold to willing buyers for salvage value.
Arrangements should be made for the regular collection of litter and for its disposal.
Proper solid waste receptacles and storage should be placed at strategic points especially to dispose packaging material from food stuff consumed by employees at lunch time.


Public health and safety


Sensitize workers and the surrounding community on awareness, prevention and management of HIV/ AIDS through staff training, awareness campaigns, multimedia, and workshops or during community 


