
				Page: 1367GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3465
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(NO. 8 OF 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED 140MW OLKARIA V GEOTHERMAL POWER PLANT IN GREATER OLKARIA AREA IN NAIVASHA SUB-COUNTY, NAKURU COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent (Kenya Electricity Generating Company Limited)is proposing to construct a 140Mwe Geothermal Power Plant Greater Olkaria area in Naivasha Sub-County, Nakuru County. proposed project involves the construction of a power plant and associated infrastructure such as the cooling tower, steam gathering system, switchyard and transmission line.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impacts


Mitigation Measures


Soil erosion


Proper planning of site clearing or disturbance of the natural vegetation.
Isolated sites with installations and frequent human presence that require re-vegetation will be surrounded by less palatable native species to act as plant screens and reduce pressure from wildlife foraging.
No grey water runoff or uncontrolled discharges from the site/working areas (including wash down areas.
Water containing pollutants such as cements, concrete, lime, chemicals and fuels shall be discharged into a conservancy tank for removal from site.
Runoff loaded with sediment and other suspended materials from the site/working areas should be prevented from discharging to adjacent watercourses and/or water bodies must be prevented.
Potential pollutants of any kind and in any form shall be kept, stored and used in such a manner that any escape can be contained and the water table not endangered.
Wash areas shall be placed and constructed in such a manner so as to ensure that the surrounding areas (including groundwater) are not polluted.


Air quality and dust


Olkaria is a fragile ecosystem; thus mobile machinery or vehicle maintenance and services should be undertaken away from project site in a yard set aside for this or by an approved garage or service station to prevent any incident of oil and fuel spills that could contaminate soils and possibly ground water quality.
Daily monitoring of air quality standards.
All construction machinery shall be maintained and serviced in accordance with the manufactures specifications.
Workers shall be trained / sensitized on dust minimization techniques and management of air pollution from vehicles and machinery.
The removal of vegetation shall be avoided until such time as clearance is required and exposed surfaces shall be revegetated or stabilized as soon as practically possible.
Frequent watering of exposed surfaces and piles of soil to prevent airborne dust emissions.
Unless inevitable, vehicles shall avoid earth roads susceptible to fugitive dust until dust management routines are done.
Incorporate dust/fumes arrestors in the batching plant e.g. use of dust nets.
Provision of appropriate protective personal equipment including respirators and aprons.


Noise and vibration


Keep machines and vehicles in good working condition as per manufacturer’s instructions.
Site and other operational workforce be provided with personal protective equipments (PPEs).
Provide signage on high noise levels and adequate notice to any local community to be potentially affected.
Daily monitoring of noise levels will need to be made during operation as per current practice.


Solid waste


Identifying environmentally acceptable spoil sites for spoil materials and approval by the Resident Engineer.
Encourage segregation by providing labelled collection and separation bins.
Encourage recycle and reuse measures for some of the spoils generated.
Waste disposal should be done by licensed collectors and handlers.


Displacement of persons


It is proposed that KenGen in liaison with Kenya Wildlife Service’s establish a site that will be accessible to the traders and the tourists who buy their merchandise, especially within Hells Gate National Park.


Occupation health and safety


Ensure compliance with all standards and legally required health and safety regulations.
Include standard best practice health and safety provisions in the construction contract. The provisions should include insurance to enable the contractor to pay for any and all treatments required by his workers including those of all subcontractors, together with any subsequent lifelong disability payments.
Establish and enforce a strict code of conduct for all project drivers including outside suppliers delivering materials.
Implement the specified H&S programme throughout the construction period.
Provide fire fighting and first aid kits.
Establish an emergency response procedure and display on all work areas. This is likely to require one vehicle on site equipped as an ambulance and a paramedic on site at all times during construction activities.


Insecurity


Ensure that the contractor develops staff code of conduct.


Impact on flora


Monitor invasive plant species at the project area and uproot unwanted germinating plants.
Assess concentration geothermal gaseous effluents such as H2S, SO2, NH3 and CO2 (e.g. by use of automatic sensors) and continually test for any evidence of acid rain.
Plant soil-erosion preventing grass species such as Cynodon dactylon, Digitaria abyssinica, Pennisetum clandestinum and Hyparrhenia dregeana at bare sloppy grounds or loose soil dumps.
Steam pipe insulations should have a well camouflaged colours that are maintained so that animals don’t perceive pipelines as barriers.
Brine flows and ponds should be located close to the source. Distant flow should be transmitted through closed pipes.
Rehabilitate disturbed areas along roads, pipelines and abandoned campsites etc by planting native plant species such as Tarconunthus and A. drepanolobium – this should be done as soon as practicable to avoid colonization by invasive and opportunistic pioneer species.
Exotic plants species should not be introduced into this area.
Create awareness among the local communities on the importance of vegetation cover and discourage them from engaging in charcoal burning.


Impact on fauna


KWS and KenGen should monitor wildlife abundance, distribution and movement in relation to this infrastructural development during construction and operation stages to aid in decision making.
Erect bumps in wildlife crossing zones.
Vehicular disturbances such as hooting should be discouraged accordingly.
Incident records (of poaching, accidents and other human wildlife conflicts etc) should be kept by monitoring and taking of corrective measures.
Roads feeding into the park area should be maintained as routes for tourist’s activities and wildlife management.
Access for earthmoving machines should be regulated.
Park rules should be enforced within the park.
Brine ponds should be located close to the source. Distant flow should be piped to prevent animal or vegetation contact.
At known animal migration corridors pipes should be elevated or buried under the ground surface. Modify pipe loop designs to minimize hindrance to wildlife movement as well as scaring them away. Other design options like pipe burying, wider loops or concave ones should be explored for habitat suitability and to ensure big game can still move along their routine corridors and routes.


 


Limiting vegetation clearing to construction areas.
Preparation of a landscape planting plan for the entire project area. Planting plan to be comprised of 75% indigenous species and to be rid of any invasive species.
Re-vegetation should target 2 million trees annually until the area is fully re-vegetated.
All embankments to be vegetated or stone pitched to prevent soil erosion.
Planting a vegetation screen along the steam pipes to reduce visual intrusion across the landscape.
Lighting to be switched off when not required.
Lighting of temporary working areas and site compounds during periods of darkness to be minimised where possible.
Prepare a proper post construction planting plan.


Brine disposal


Brine ponds should be sited close to the source.
Brine re-injection through re-injection wells into underground reservoir.
Chemical composition and parameters of the brine should be routinely monitored.


Accidental spillage resulting in contamination of chemicals and soil


Spill and drip trays used during servicing of machinery.
Response plans for accidental spills to be formulated and routinely tested.
Bunded storage areas and secondary containment for oil and chemicals.
Use of an oil interceptor in the plant.


Oil/hazardous pollution


Hazardous materials shall not be stored within 2 kilometres of the top water level of public water supply reservoirs.
Hazardous materials shall be stored above flood level.
Areas for the storage of fuel and othe flammable materials shall comply with standard fire safety regulations.
Chemicals and fuel shall be stored in storage tanks within a secure compound. All chemicals and fuels shall be stored in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
Storage areas or secondary containment shall be constructed of waterproof reinforced concrete or approved equivalent, which is not adversely affected by contact with chemicals captured within them.
The minimum volume for secondary containment shall be 110% of the capacity of the largest tank system, plus 10% of the total capacity of all other separate tanks and containers within the bund wall with closed valves for controlled draining during rains.
Pipe-work carrying product from the tank to facilities outside the containment shall be provided with secondary containment; Tank equipment such as dispensing hoses, valves, meters, pumps, and gauges shall be located within the containment or provided with own containment.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nakuru County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/4766535              National Environment Management Authority.

