
				Page: 1346GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 3585
TASKFORCE TO DEVELOP BAIL AND BOND POLICY GUIDELINES
APPOINTMENT
PURSUANT to Article 49 (1) (h) and Sub-Article (2) of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code (Cap. 75) laws of Kenya related to the application of bail and bond, and section 34 of the Judicial Service Act, the Chief Justice of the Republic of Kenya has appointed a taskforce to develop a Bail Policy Guidelines aimed at streamlining and addressing disparities in the application of bail and bond for arrested and accused persons.
(a) The taskforce shall comprise of the following members—
Lady Justice Lydia Achode—Judiciary—(Chairperson)
Clement Okech—Probation and Aftercare Service (Vice-Chairperson)
Kioko Kamula—Directorate of Public Prosecution
Michael Wiso—National Police Service
Lilian Renee Omondi—Law Society of Kenya
Anne Ong’injo—Judiciary
Emmanuel Ndunda—Kenya Prison Service 
Lenson Njogu—Legal Resources Foundation
Facilitors:
Katra Sambili (Ms.)
Beverline Ongaro (Ms.)
2.  The terms of reference of the taskforce are to—
(b) Develop a National Bail Policy that will guide police and judicial officers on the application of laws that provide for bail and bond.
(c)  To make appropriate recommendations on legislative and regulatoryamendments  necessary for addressing inconsistencies and enabling fair administration of bail and bond measures.
The taskforce may—
(a) Co-opt such other persons, who possess the appropriate competencies as are necessary for the performance of the terms of reference.
(b) Seek the assistance of expert(s) as is necessary for better fulfilment of its task
4.  The taskforce shall—
(a) Prepare a detailed work plan including the methodology of its work
(b)  Review current bail practices, international best practices and any document related to the terms of reference; and
(c)   Engage stakeholders in the justice sector by:
(i)       Holding consultative discussions
(ii)     Visiting prisons and remand homes including children’s remand homes to collect views
(iii)    Receiving memoranda
5.  The taskforce shall regulate its own procedure.
6.  The taskforce shall submit reports of the progress made to the Deputy Chief Justice.
7.  The taskforce shall submit the final report and the Bail policy document to the judiciary within seven months from the date of gazettement.
Dated the 22nd May, 2014.
WILLY MUTUNGA,
Chief Justice and Chair,
of the National Council on the Administration of Justice.

