
				Page: 2607GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8203
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED JUJA–THIKA SOUTH SEWERAGE SYSTEM AND TREATMENT WORKS IN KIAMBU COUNTY.
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Athi Water Services Board, is proposing Juja - Thika South Sewerage System and Treatment Works in Kiambu County.The  proposed  sewage treatment  works  for Juja and  Thika  South  are  provided  at  different  locations depending on the natural drainage patterns. The designed STW are: (i) Juja  STW at  Ruiru T-Works, serving a section of Ruiru and Juja  area, is located  near Ruiru River, (ii) Thika STW is an existing works located along Komo River. A new  system  will  be designed  to  cater  for  Southern  parts of Thika Municipality on Land adjacent  to  the existing  treatment  works.  The existing treatment works will be rehabilitated and expanded. The sewage treatment works recommended will comprise of the following units:- (a) Inlet works with coarse and fine bar screens, (b) Horizontal flow grit removal channels, (c) Flow measuring Parshall flumes, (d) Waste Stabilization Ponds, (e) Utility Buildings expansion/Rehabilitation, if  required, consisting of offices, workshop and Generator Rooms at both sites. (f) Rehabilitation/Expansion of double grade 9 staff house at Thika.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
 

Potential Impact 


Mitigation Measures


Air pollution
 


A regular vehicle maintenance and repair program.
Ensure that all vehicles involved in the transport of construction material and staff, and machinery involved in the construction is properly maintained and serviced.
Machines must not be left idling for unnecessary periods of time; this will save fuel and reduce emissions.
Use of dust control methods, such as covers, water suppression.
Ensure that all material (sand and aggregate) stockpiled on the site to be used in construction activities are regularly sprayed to reduce the effects of wind whipping.
Ensure that all trucks carrying aggregate and sand are covered during delivery to the site.


Water pollution
 


Provide workers at the development site with chemical toilets during this phase of the development. A reasonable ratio would be fifteen (15) workers per toilet.
 Store all raw materials away from the vicinity of water bodies located on the property to avoid contamination in these areas.
General refuse generated during these phases of the development must be stockpiled in one central area of the development site, away from existing water bodies and collected, transported and disposed of appropriately at the designated disposal site.
Waste water Management.


Soil erosion and contamination
 


Only remove vegetation from areas for the STW/sewers construction.
Install appropriate drainage systems to direct water away from slopes.
Designate a main access route for heavy machinery.
Avoid site Preparation in period when wind velocities are highest.
Areas storing hazardous substances such as diesel must be properly contained in a bunded area.
In the event of an oil spill the contaminated soil must be removed and disposed off.
Develop a spill management plan (with appropriate budget).


Solid wastes
 


Use an integrated wastes management system.
Agreement with suppliers to accept the return of unused materials.
Agreement with and license details of companies to be used for the off-site transport of wastes.
Agreement with and license details of companies to be used for the off-site transport of wastes.
The Contractor shall set up a solid waste control and removal system.
Bins shall be emptied on a daily basis.
Waste and litter shall be disposed of into scavenger – and weather proof bins.
Agreement with the county government and for timely removal of solid waste.


Disturbance of traffic and difficulty of access
 


Provide diversion routes where possible.
Give a construction itinerary in advance so that the potentially affected population can use alternative routes and start early to get to their destinations on time.
Erect warning signs of ongoing works.
Expedite construction works so as to reduce the times where roads are blocked.
Access of residents should be facilitated by installing appropriate temporary bridges over the pipeline trenches.
Suitable warning signs should be placed at near locations and should be visible at night.
A guard should be available 24 hours to help people access across pipeline trenches.


Damage of underground infrastructure
 


Get maps of the underground infrastructure from the relevant institutions.
Sensitize workers carrying out excavations so that they exercise caution to minimize chances of underground infrastructure damage.
Work closely with the responsible institutions such as Kenya Power, THIWASCO, RUJWASCO and Telkom’s so that incase of damage, the services are restored within the shortest time.
Reroute sensitive infrastructure where possible.


Structural stability
 


The geotechnical report should include suitable measures for confining vibrations within project sites.
These recommendations identified in the geotechnical report (such as secant piling or sheet piling or establish cut-off walls) should be implemented by the contractor and supervised by EHS Advisor.
Blasting should not be done near houses or power lines.


Displacement of people
 


Avoid displacement as much as possible.
Prompt and fair compensation of all the PAPs before beginning of works on the site .
Pre and post resettlement counseling’ssupport: including timely information sharing and grievance redress.
Financial education for the recipients of compensation funds including women in the HHs.
Identification and full resettlement assistance for vulnerable PAPs.


Water and soil pollution from leaks and sewage overflow and leaks
 


Awareness raising among community members not to dump solids that can cause blockage leading to bursts and spills.
Ensure sufficient hydraulic capacity to accommodate peak flows and adequate slope in gravity mains to prevent build-up of solids and hydrogen sulphide generation.
Design manhole covers to withstand anticipated loads and ensure that the covers can be readily replaced if broken to minimize entry of garbage and silt into the system.
Development of an inventory of system components, with information including age, construction materials, drainage areas served, elevations, etc.
Regular cleaning of grit chambers and sewer lines to remove grease, grit, and other debris that may lead to sewer backups. Cleaning should be conducted more frequently for problem areas. Cleaning activities may require removal of tree roots and other identified obstructions.
Monitoring of sewer flow to identify potential inflows and outflows.
Conduct repairs prioritized based on the nature and severity of the problem.
Immediate clearing of blockage or repair is warranted where an overflow is currently occurring or for urgent problems that may cause an imminent overflows.
Citizens’ sensitization of the importance of monitoring and operational costs related to the sewer lines to promote security of the infrastructure and timely attention to need of repairs.


Accidents and injuries in STW
 


Install railing around all process tanks and pits. Require use of a life line and personal flotation device (PFD) when workers are inside the railing, and ensure rescue buoys and throw bags are readily available.
Use PFDs when working near waterways.
Implement a confined spaces entry program that is consistent with applicable national requirements and internationally accepted standards.
Valves to process tanks should be locked to prevent accidental flooding during maintenance.
Maintain work areas to minimize slipping and tripping hazards.
Use proper techniques for trenching and shoring.


Exposure to hazardous chemicals
 


Implement a training program for operators who work with chlorine and ammonia regarding safe handling practices and emergency response procedures.
Provide appropriate personal protective equipment and training on its proper use and maintenance.
Prepare escape plans from areas where there might be a chlorine or ammonia emission.
Install safety showers and eye wash stations near the chlorine and ammonia equipment and other areas where hazardous chemicals are stored or used.
Communicate escape plans on the regular basis to the relevant stakeholders.
Continuously monitor air quality in work areas for hazardous conditions (e.g. explosive atmosphere, oxygen deficiency).
Prohibit eating, smoking, and drinking except in designated areas.
Rotate personnel among the various treatment plant operations to reduce inhalation of air-stripped chemicals, aerosols, and other potentially hazardous materials.


Liquid effluents
 


Design, construct, operate, and maintain wastewater treatment facilities and achieve effluent water quality consistent with applicable national requirements or internationally accepted standards and consistent with effluent water quality goals based on the assimilative capacity and the most sensitive end use of the receiving water.
Consider discharge of treated wastewater to natural or constructed wetlands, which can buffer the impact from discharge on the aquatic environment, unless the wetland itself would be degraded by the discharge.
Treat greywater, if collected separately from sewage, to remove organic pollutants and reduce the levels of suspended solids, pathogenic organisms and other problematic substances to acceptable levels based on applicable national and local regulations.
Based on an assessment of risks to human health and the environment, consider re-use of treated effluent, especially in areas with limited raw water supplies.
Monitoring the effluent quality through sampling and laboratory analysis.


Sludge disposal
 


Select appropriate sludge treatment technologies.
Develop and Implement faecal sludge management plan.
Land application or other beneficial re-use of wastewater treatment plant residuals should be considered but only based on an assessment of risks to human health and the environment.
Processing, disposal and re-use of wastewater treatment plant residuals should be consistent with applicable National requirements or, in their absence, internationally accepted guidance and standards.


Offensive odours
 


Provide adequate buffer area, such as trees, or fences, between processing areas and potential receptors.
Cover emission points (e.g., aeration basins, clarifiers, sludge thickeners, tanks, and channels), and vent emissions to control systems (e.g., compost beds, bio-filters, chemical scrubbers, etc.) as needed to reduce odours and otherwise meet applicable national requirements and internationally accepted guidelines;
Where necessary, consider alternate aeration technologies or process configurations to reduce volatilization.
Proper operations and maintenance of the STW.
Monitoring daily to ensure pH is optimum for proper functioning.
Fill the facultative ponds with fresh water before commissioning.


Health risks related to irrigation with treated sewage
 


Consider use of drip irrigation of treated wastewater, which minimizes worker exposure and the amount of water needed.
Control vectors and intermediate hosts of disease-causing micro-organisms.
Treat wastewater and sludge used for land application in a manner consistent with WHO Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater and applicable national requirements.
Stop irrigation with treated wastewater two weeks prior to harvesting.
Limit irrigation with treated wastewater to crops that are cooked before eating.
Restrict public access to hydraulic structures carrying wastewater and to fields irrigated with treated wastewater.


Wildlife and scavenger birds’ attractions to the STW.
 


Proper fencing of the Plant to keep off wildlife is recommended
Maintaining high standards of hygiene at the site throughout the operation phase of the facility
Constant consultations with KWS in event that wildlife is spotted in the area.
The inlet works should be enclosed in a building to avoid exposure to birds
Daily Burying of the wastes in appropriate solid Waste disposal section covering with soil, this reduces the tonnage of wastes on site and exposing the wastes to scavenging birds

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, N.H.I.F. Building, 12th Floor, Ragati Road, Upper Hill, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kiambu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project.
R. ORINA,
for Director-General,
MR/8449053         National Environment Management Authority.

