
				Page: 2606GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7962
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED GATED DEVELOPMENT, AT RIAT HILLS  IN KISUMU CITY COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, Home Afrika Limited, is proposing  gated Development at Riat Hills, in Kisumu City County. The Project involves the construction of  gated community development with other related components such as town houses, apartments, conference facility, row houses, kindergarten, duplexes and studio units; country club with Commercial and hotel facilities, tennis, basketball, badminton, volleyball, netball and squash court among others to meet the demand of the growing number of tenants in Kisumu City and its environs.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Expected NegativeImpacts


Mitigation Measures


Air and dust pollution


Spray water on loose soil and debris during excavation, construction and decommissioning phases
Minimize emission of exhaust fumes through servicing of machinery in use
Personal protective equipment to be worn
Erect dust screens and buffer fences to minimize the amount of dust generated during excavation, construction and demolition during project decommissioning.


Increased solid and liquid wastes


Use of an integrated solid waste management system i.e. recover, recycle   and reuse
Dispose all solid wastes at dumping site approved by the council and NEMA.
Channel all liquid waste to the modular decentralized effluent treatment plant.
Excess rainwater from the property to be channeled to drainage civil works on roads.
Through accurate estimation of the sizes and qualities of materials required, order materials in the sizes and qualities they will be needed, rather than cutting them to size or having large quantity residual materials.
Use building materials that have minimal or no packaging to avoid the generation of excessive packaging waste
Reuse packaging materials such as cartons, cement bags, empty metals and plastic containers to reduce waste at the site.


Hydrology and water supply quality degradation


Hazardous substance control and emergency response plan that will include preparation for quick and safe clean up of accidental spill.
Hazard pus-materials handling procedures to reduce the  potentials for spill during construction.
Identify areas where refueling and vehicle maintenance activities and storage of hazardous materials, if any, shall be permitted.


Increased water demand


Use water conservatively.
Harvest rain water.


Increased energy demand


Use energy saving bulbs.
Put off lights when not in use.
Harvest solar energy.


Risk of fire outbreak


Install fire extinguishers and hydrants.
Fire exit to be provided.


Noise pollution


Provide workers with ear plugs and muffs.
Fix very noisy machines with silencers.


Occupational health and safety of workers


Sensitize workers on safety measures required during excavation, construction and decommissioning of the project.
Provide workers with appropriate personal protective clothing e.g. helmets, gloves and boots.
Provide well stocked first aid kits on site


Generation of wastewater


Provision of means for handling sewerage generated by construction workers ( there are toilets connected to septic tanks on the site).
Conduct regular checks for sewage pipe blockages or damages since vices can lead to release of the effluent into the land water bodies.
Monitor effluent quality regularly to ensure that the stipulated discharge rules and standards are not violated.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kisumu County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days
from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
Z. O. OUMA,
for Director-General,
MR/8477099         National Environment Management Authority.

