
				Page: 2609GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 8204
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED FUEL AND LPG DEPOT, OFF NANYUKI ROAD WITHIN INDUSTRIAL AREA IN NAIROBI CITY COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Hass Petroleum (K) Limited, is proposing a Fuel and LPG Depot, off Nanyuki Road, within Industrial Area in Nairobi City County.
The Project entails; putting up a Fuel Depot, LPG depot, Storage Tanks, Pump house, Car Parking area and Support Infrastructural facilities. The design for the industrial and warehouse facility provides for putting up of three fuel tanks each having a capacity of 2036m3, a pump house, LPG Pump house, foam tank, fire pump house, water tank of 500m3 capacity, oil interceptor, LPG tanker filling point, automated filling plant, cylinder storage area, LPG storage vessels, weigh bridge, an office and a go down. The proposed facility will have a total of three floors (ground floor level, first floor level and second floor level).The ground floor will comprise of an office space, kitchen, gents, ladies, executive office, waiting area, store and an entrance. The second and third floor plans will have an office space, conference room, store, kitchen, fire exits, gents and ladies facilities.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:
 

Possible Impacts


Mitigation measures


Storm water, run-off and Soil erosion


Install proper drainage structures.
Ensure that construction vehicles are restricted to existing graded roadsLandscaping of disturbed areas.
Control earthworks.
Install drainage structures properly.
Ensure management of excavation.


Air pollution


Stockpiles  of earth should be sprayed with water or covered during extreme dry weather.
Provide dust masks for the personnel in dust generation areas.
Provide appropriate dust screens where necessary.
Cover all trucks hauling soil, sand and other loose materials.
Avoid pouring dust materials from elevated areas to ground.
Minimization of exhaust gas emissions by reducing engine idling times and ensuring that equipment is properly tuned and maintained.
Sprinkle water on graded access routes when necessary.


Noise pollution


Sensitize workforce including drivers of construction vehicles to avoid loud hooting especially in  sensitive areas.
Install sound barriers for pile driving activity.
Install portable barriers to shield compressors and other small stationary equipment where necessary.
Maintain all equipment.
Workers in the vicinity of high level noise to wear  appropriate safety and protective gear, i.e. ear plugs and ear muffs.


Vegetation disturbance


Ensure proper demarcation and delineation of the project area.
Designate access routes and parking areas within the site.
Specify areas of the site which should be kept free of traffic, equipment, and storage.


Solid waste generation


Develop and  adopt an Integrated Solid Waste Management plan.
Order materials in the sizes and quantities on demand basis.
Donate recyclable/reusable or residual materials.
Use of durable, long-lasting materials that will not need to be replaced as often.
Use building materials that have minimal or no packaging.
Provide waste collection points at the site.


Oil Spills and gas leakages.


Carry out regular waste water analysis.
Regular monitoring and inspection of fuel and gas storage and transportation vessels.
Install warning signage at areas prone to oil spills and gas leakages.


Energy Conservation


Install energy saving fluorescent tubes.
Ensure electrical equipment, appliances and lights are switched off when not being used.
Plan transportation of materials during off-peak hours to ensure that fossil fuels (diesel, petrol) are not consumed in excessive amounts.


Fire Outbreak/ Safety


Train all workers in Fire safety procedures.
Ensure adequate tank spacing.
Undertake a fire risk assessment for the site and develop a comprehensive fire management plan.
Install adequate fire fighting equipment and ensure regular maintenance of the same.


Increased Water Demand


Install water conserving taps.
Promote recycling and reuse of water.
Promptly detect and repair water pipe and tank leaks.
Ensure taps are not running when not in use.
Sensitize staff to conserve water.


Generation of wastewater


Conduct regular checks for pipe blockages or damages.
Ensure that the effluent generated is monitored for its quality and should meet the stipulated standards before it is directed to the existing sewerage network.


Road safety and traffic


Installation of road signs on main  access points to the site.
Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles.
Implement Traffic Management Plan.


Public health and occupational safety


Ensure registration of premises as per OSHA, 2007.
Ensure posting of important OSH abstracts, policies, notices and signage.
Ensure sensitization of neighbors and other stakeholders on the dangers and risks associated with the construction activities.
Provide provisions for reporting of incidents and accidents.
Provide suitable, efficient, clean and adequate sanitary conveniences.
Monitor and ensure full compliance to the use of PPE.
Ensure training and supervision of inexperienced workers.
Promote safe means of access within the site.
Ensure that materials are stored or stacked in such manner that will prevent any fall or collapse and are not stored against weak walls.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and Regional Authorities, N.H.I.F. Building, 12th Floor, Ragati Road, Upper Hill, P.O. Box 30126–00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process for this project. Comments can also be e-mailed to dgnema@nema.go.ke
S. MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/8477053         National Environment Management Authority.

