
				Page: 3084GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  9648
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OF OFFICES, STAFF QUARTERS AND CONFERENCE HALL IN KAREN ON PLOT LR. NO. 3586/400 AND 29713/4, NAIROBI COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The Proponent, AFRIGO Development Company Limited has proposed to construct offices, dining and recreational facility, conference hall, staff quarters, green areas, access gates and basketball court along Langata road in Karen, off Hillcrest road passing within the proposed area of development.  The  total  project  area  measures  about 6.8560 hectares with site A comprising of about 4.3180 hectares on  LR No. 29713/4 and site B comprising of 2.6380 hectares on L.R No. 3586/400. Site B is located on the RHS of Hillcrest Road from Langata Road while site A is located on the LHS.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Impact


Proposed Mitigation Measure


Noise and vibration


Formulate an inspection and maintenance program for the machines and equipment on site.
Implement both engineering and administrative controls for machines and equipment to reduce noise pollution at the site.
Comply with  the  provisions  of Environmental  Management  and Coordination  (Noise  and  Excessive Vibration Pollution) (Control)  Regulations, 2009  regarding  noise  limits  at  the workplace.


Dust generation


Sprinkling of water at the site and access roads during dry conditions to suppress fugitive dust
Fix a dust proof net five (5) meters high above the hoarding


Solid waste


Contract a NEMA licensed waste handler to manage solid waste
Apply an Integrated Solid Waste Management approach
Adhere to the provisions of the Waste Management Regulations of 2006



Air Pollution: Fumes


Use of low sulphur diesel for diesel powered vehicles and equipment.
Proper maintenance of machinery and vehicles
Prohibit open burning of any kind of waste on site


Risk of occupational accidents and diseases


Set up a health and safety committee and periodic site inspections, training and annual safety audits.
Provide appropriate PPEs to workers and visitors to the site
Adhere to the provisions of the Occupational Health and Safety Act of 2007.


Generation of waste water


Construction of septic tanks and a bio digester
Identify opportunities for reuse of waste water
Formulate and implement an inspection and maintenance program for the waste water disposal system


Increased demand for water and electricity


Incorporate rain water harvesting technology in the project design
Encourage water reuse and/or  recycling
Use of energy efficient machines and appliances
Provision of a standby generator


Land degradation


Limit excavations to areas marked for development
Apply a layer of selected backfill material on the access roads


Vegetation clearance


Ensure vegetation is only cleared in areas where foundations are to be dug
Trees to be protected insitu to be clearly identified on the plans and communicated to all construction staff.


Traffic Congestion


Transport of materials during the traffic off peak  hours  to  avoid  possible  traffic congestion,
Purchasing  of  material  according  to  the demand,
Ensuring  minimal  residence  period  for trucks mobilizing material on site,
Proper planning during construction period.


Insecurity


Employ construction workers who possess  valid certificates of good conduct
Provide  screening arrangements at the gate
Formulate a comprehensive security plan and implement it. Contract a reputable security firm to be in charge of security at the site.
Liaise with the neighbours and the local administration in security management

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Nairobi County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
DAVID ONGARE,
for Director-General,
MR/8448590         National Environment Management Authority. 

