
				Page: 3082GAZETTE NOTICE NO.  9646
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND
CO-ORDINATION ACT
(No. 8 of 1999)
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY REPORT FOR THE PROPOSED SAVANNA RESORT DEVELOPMENT ON PLOT L.R NO. KAJIADO/KAPUTIEI CENTRAL 1748, KAJIADO COUNTY
INVITATION OF PUBLIC COMMENTS
PURSUANT to regulation 21 of the Environmental Management and Co-ordination (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2003, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has received an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report for the above proposed project.
The proponent, Isaac Iajos Ogondo Ogai, is proposing to put up a resort on L.R. No. Kajiado/Kaputiei central 1748 in Mashuru, Kajiado County.  The proposed project involves the construction of a resort with the following specifications; tented campsite with 21 tents, bar, gym and a central building which will comprise a restaurant, swimming pool, man-made lake which will be used as a water reservoir, staff housing, 30 units of three bed roomed houses, a golf course, one perimeter wall for the fence and electric fence, The proposed project will also have a waste water treatment facility, stair cases on each house, red oxide floor surfaces, sanitary and kitchen facilities for each of the housing units.
The following are the anticipated impacts and proposed mitigation measures:

Environmental/Social Impact


Proposed Mitigation and Aspects for Monitoring


Changes in hydrology/ impended drainage


proper installation of drainage structures.
Install cascades to break the impact of water flowing in the drains.
Ensure efficiency of drainage structures trough proper design and maintenance.
Provide gratings to the drainage channels.


Soil integrity


Control earthworks and compact loose soils.
Install drainage structures properly.
Landscaping.
Ensure management of excavation   activities.
Control activities especially during rainy conditions.
Provide soil erosion control and conservation structures where necessary.
Efficiency of erosion control measures.


Air pollution


Control speed and operation of construction vehicles.
Prohibit idling of vehicles.
Water should be sprayed during the construction phase of excavated areas.
Regular maintenance of construction plant and equipment.
Engage sensitive construction workers.


Noise pollution


Sensitize drivers of construction machinery.
Construction and production activities to be restricted to daytime
Workers in the vicinity of or involved in high-level noise to wear safety and protective gear.


Oil pollution


Proper storage, handling and disposal of new oil and used oil wastes.
Maintain equipment to avoid leaks.
Maintenance of construction vehicles should be carried out in the contractors yard (off the site).


Water resources


Management of water usage. Avoid unnecessary wastage.
recycling of water at the construction phase where possible and also in occupation.
Make use of roof catchments to provide water i.e. for general purpose.


Contractors lay down area


Special attention should be paid to the sanitary facilities on site.
Garbage should be disposed off periodically and at approved dumpsites.


Road safety


Enforce speed limits for construction vehicles especially along roads leading to the site.
Provide bill boards at the site/entrance to notify motorists about the development.


Public health and occupational safety


Train workers on occupational health and safety.
Provide full protective gear and workmen’s compensation cover in addition to the right tools and operational instructions & manuals.
Adopt sound waste management system to ensure proper solid waste disposal and collection facilities.
Ensure effective wastewater management.
Sensitize residents on environmental management.
Design of sewerage system should be as provided in the plans.
Engage the services of qualified personnel and/or ensure training.
Ensure wholesome water is available for drinking.
Make health and safety awareness a priority.
Post clear warning signs e.g. ‘No unauthorized use of machines’, ensure there are guards on moving parts etc.
Provide fully equipped First Aid kits and train staff on its use.
Sensitize residents on environmental management.


Vegetation


Replant areas where vegetation is unnecessarily removed.
Landscaping and planting all disturbed areas.
Planting and grassing should be done just before the rains or irrigated on dry spells.


Fire safety and preparedness


Install firefighting equipment as provided elsewhere in the report.
Conduct training on firefighting, evacuation and emergency response.
Sensitize the workers on fire risks i.e. conduct regular fire drills.
Provide emergency numbers at strategic points.


Security


Provide security guards and facilities during the entire project cycle.

The full report of the proposed project is available for inspection during working hours at:
(a) Director-General, NEMA, Popo Road, off Mombasa Road, P.O. Box 67839–00200, Nairobi.
(b) Principal Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources, NHIF Building, Community, P.O. Box 30126-00100, Nairobi.
(c) County Director of Environment, Kajiado County.
The National Environment Management Authority invites members of the public to submit oral or written comments within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of this notice to the Director-General, NEMA, to assist the Authority in the decision making process of the plan.
SALOME MACHUA,
for Director-General,
MR/8448620         National Environment Management Authority.

