
				Page: 2959GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7894
THE LAND REGISTRATION ACT
(No. 3 OF 2012)
REGISTRATION OF INSTRUMENT
WHEREAS Bedan Githinji Stanley (deceased), of Kirinyaga in the Republic of Kenya, is registered as proprietor of that piece of land known as Kiine/Kibingoti/Nguguine/145, situate in the district of Kirinyaga, and whereas the High Court of Kenya at Kerugoya in succession cause No. 12 of 2013 has issued grant and confirmation letters to Zipporah W. Gathigia Githinji, and whereas all efforts made to recover the land tide deed issued in respect of the said piece of land by the land registrar for cancellation have failed, notice is given that after expiration of thirty (30) days from the date hereof, provided no valid objection has been received within that period, I intend to dispense with the production of the said land tide deed and proceed with the registration of the said administration letters to the said Zipporah W. Gathigia Githinji, and upon such registration the land tide deed issued earlier to the said Bedan Githinji Stanley (deceased), shall be deemed cancelled and of no effect.
Dated the 31st October, 2014.
W.N. MUGURO,
MR/5951899                Land Registrar, Kiambu District.


				Page: 2959GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7894
THE LAND REGISTRATION ACT (NO. 3 O/2012)
REGISTRATION OF INSTRUMENT
WHEREAS Bedan Githinji Stanley (deceased), of Kirinyaga in the Republic of Kenya, is registered as proprietor of that piece of land known as Kiine/Kibingoti/Nguguine/145, situate in the district of Kirinyaga, and whereas the High Court of Kenya at Kerugoya in succession cause No. 12 of 2013 has issued grant and confirmation letters to Zipporah W. Gathigia Githinji, and whereas all efforts made to recover the land tide deed issued in respect of the said piece of land by the land registrar for cancellation have failed, notice is given that 
after expiration of thirty (30) days from the date hereof, provided no valid objection has been received within that period, I intend to dispense with the production of the said land tide deed and proceed with the registration of the said administration letters to the said Zipporah W. Gathigia Githinji, and upon such registration the land tide deed issued earlier to the said Bedan Githinji Stanley (deceased), shall be deemed cancelled and of no effect.
Dated the 31st October, 2014. MR/5834400
C. W. NJAGI,
Land Registrar, Kirinyaga District.

