
				Page: 2994GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7915
THE TRANSFER OF BUSINESSES ACT
(CAP. 500)
AIRTEL NETWORKS KENYA LIMITED
BUSINESSES TRANSFER
NOTICE is hereby given under section 3 of the Transfer of Businesses Act (Cap. 500) of the Laws of Kenya regarding transfer of certain assets of Airtel Networks Kenya Limited (hereinafter referred to as Airtel or the Transferor), including the Transferor's:
telecommunication towers and associated non active equipment in Kenya (hereinafter referred to as "Passive Infrastructure");
the residual lease interest in the land and buildings on which the Passive Infrastructure is situated;
all rights benefits and obligations under any contracts or agreements between the transferor and third parties relating to such Passive Infrastructure including but not limited to leases, site-sharing agreements, insurance policies and warranties;
all rights benefits and obligations under any permits, certifications, and approvals pertaining to the Passive Infrastructure; (together referred to as the "Business")
to Kenya Towers Limited (hereinafter referred to as "Transferee") which will carry on the business of the provision of telecommunications network facility services using, inter alia, the above assets.
The Transferor is a company duly incorporated in Kenya under the Companies Act (Cap. 486) and is licensed under The Kenya Information and Communications Act (Cap. 411 A) to provide network facility services and mobile telecommunication services in Kenya.
The registered office address of the Transferor is Parkside Towers, Mombasa Road, and P. O. Box 73146—00200, Nairobi, Kenya.
The Transferee is a company duly incorporated in Kenya under the Companies Act (Cap. 486) and is licensed under The Kenya Information and Communications Act (Cap. 411 A) to provide telecommunication network facility services in Kenya.
The registered office address of the Transferee is Parkside Towers, Mombasa Road, P. O. Box 73146—00200, Nairobi, Kenya.
All debts, liabilities and obligations due and owing by the Transferor in respect of the Business up to the date of transfer shall be paid by the Transferor. The Transferee is not assuming nor does it intend to assume any debts, liabilities and obligations whatsoever incurred by the Transferor in the said business up to the date of transfer.
ADIL EL YOUSSEFI, for transferor,
Managing Director Airtel Networks Kenya Limited
PRAKASH RANJALKAR,
for transferee,
MR/5951898                                                                            Kenya Towers Limited.

