
				Page: 2967GAZETTE NOTICE NO. 7904
THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT
ACT, 2004
GUIDELINES FOR APPOINTMENT/OPERATING A FREE TRADE ZONE
(FTZ)
PURSUANT to the provisions of Section 12 of the East African Community Customs Management Act, 2004, the Commissioner of Customs Services prescribes the Guidelines set out hereto as the interim Guidelines to be fulfilled by an applicant to operate a Customs Area carrying on the Business of a Free Trade Zone:
I. Requirements for Gazettement
An application for appointment to operate a Free Trade Zone shall be made to the Ministry Responsible for SEZs and shall be submitted together with the relevant architectural drawings showing its situation in relation to other developments or thoroughfares.
The Plans for buildings or structures submitted to the Ministry Responsible for SEZs shall be in strict compliance with the following conditions:
(a) Adherence to the laws governing buildings, construction and erection of structures;
(b) Assurance that the buildings or structures are at least five meters away from the perimeter fence of a FTZ;
(c) Assurance that all expenses for the demolition of structures orbuildings by the Operator arc borne by the Operator;
(d) Abandonment of buildings or structures after the expiry or revocation of a license shall not give rise to a claim by the Operator; and
(e) Any space, building or structure erected in a FTZ may be let to any licensee on such terms and conditions as the Ministry Responsible for SEZs may approve.
The Zone should be located in plots and sizes as determined by the Ministry Responsible for SEZs from time to time.
The Zone should have access to the National Highway and/ Or Railway line
The Zone should be located not more than 30 kilometers from the Port of Kilindini in the case of handling of goods imported by Sea, or within 5kms from the existing International Airports in case of handling goods by air.
The Zone must have its surface area properly graveled and /or paved as appropriate.
The Zone shall erect and maintain a strong perimeter wall or fence it and should provide adequate security for the goods in the FTZ and shall take all necessary measures to ensure their security. The premises and means of access shall be kept under permanent supervision.
All designated entry and exit points at the FTZ shall be manned by armed government security during and after the specified hours of business.
It will be the responsibility of the FTZ operator to meet any additional requirements to ensure provision of the armed government security.
The Zone should have floodlights installed to light up its entire surface area. The Zone should have suitable office accommodation for Kenya Revenue Authority officers and Other staff from the Relevant Government Agencies including proper sanitation facilities for use by the officers and other authorized users of the facility.
The office provided should be installed with computer facilities and such other suitable office Equipment for use by the resident Kenya Revenue Authority officers. This includes computer software that is compatible with that of Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) and facilities for electronic tracking of all the goods imported into the Zone including an electronic gate pass system that can be linked to the Electronic Clearance system in use by Customs.
Provision of separate facilities, including loading, offloading and Inspection facilities, for the verification of goods within into the zone.
Avail Surveillance cameras and a suitable facility to accommodate mobile cargo scanning equipment.
The FTZ operator must have operational cargo scanning equipment.
The Zone should have adequate parking yards that are consistent with local authorities' by-laws.
The Commissioner shall conduct the normal checks for Gazettment of a Customs area to his/her satisfaction prior to gazetting the area proposed by the Ministry responsible for SEZ.
The Commissioner will Gazette a Free Trade Zone once a proposal for appointment to operate the Zone has been done by the Ministry Responsible for Special Economic Zones (SEZ).
II. Operations within the FTZ
All persons or vehicles entering or leaving the FTZ shall use designated entry and exit points and shall comply with laid down security requirements including specified hours of business, as the Commissioner may determine.
All goods to and from the Zone will be conveyed through use of Electronic Cargo Tracking System.
The FTZ shall be non-smoking areas and no naked flames or fires shall be lit in the Zone. The Zone Operator shall place posters in conspicuous places in the Zone specifying this prohibition, for the benefit of all the Zone users.
All goods entering the Zone shall be free from import duties and taxes and shall be deemed to be outside the customs territory and not subject to the usual customs controls.
The Commissioner shall have the right at any time, to carry out spot checks, to stop and search any person or vehicle entering or leaving a FTZ and to ensure proper accounting of goods based on a risk-manag :ment system.
Goods sold within the EAC Region shall attract taxes at Destination as provided for under the Single Customs Territory(SCT)regime.
(2) All goods exported outside the EAC region shall be exempted from taxes.
Equipment to be used solely inside the FTZ for transportation, storage and processing of goods and office stores, fuel, food and beverages to be consumed by the people working inside a FTZ, may be exempted from import duties and taxes subject to the satisfaction of the Commissioner and fulfillment of conditions stipulated in the national legislation
The activities that may be carried out within the Free Trade Zone shall include;
(a) Labeling, packing and repacking;
(b) Sorting, grading, cleaning and mixing;
(c) Breaking bulk;
(d) Simple assembly;
(e) Grouping of packages; and
(f) Any other activity that may be determined by the competent
Ministry responsible for SEZ in consultation with the Commissioner, Customs Services
Retail Trade and Re-export to the Zone shall not be carried out in the Zone except with the prior written permission of the Ministry Responsible for SEZs in consultation with the Commissioner, Customs Services.
The Zone Operator shall maintain proper records of the goods by maintaining special registers, stock books, books of accounts relevant declarations and computer records in order to control the circulation of goods.
The Zone Operator shall submit to the Ministry Responsible for SEZs and the Commissioner, Customs Services a monthly return in respect of:
(a) All goods received into or re-exported from his or her premises;
(b) The stock of all the products on the premises at the close of
business on the last day of every month;
(c) Waste stock.
(d) Loss through evaporation, processing, damage, spillage; leakage or other cause.
The monthly return shall be submitted on/ or before the tenth day of the month immediately, following the month to which the return relates.
The Operator shall permit the Commissioner at all reasonable times, to inspect the records of the Zone and to have access to any premises in the Zone for the purpose of examining goods and checking the records and making a comparison of the goods and their records.
Any other condition that the Ministry Responsible for SEZs may reasonably impose from time to time in consultation with the Commissioner, Customs Service.
BEATRICE MEMO,Commissioner, Customs Services Department.


